GUIDING
PRINCIPLES
For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human
Trafficking




     The Southeast Regional Human Trafficking Advisory Group
     An Initiative of the Administration for Children and Families Region 4 Office
                          As the field of human trafficking specific services continues
                              to grow to support the recovery and empowerment
                 of this incredibly diverse population and their various trauma experiences,
                     may we all recognize the value of core principles to guide our work,
                                 so that we do no harm as we come alongside
                             victims and survivors to support and empower them.




                                                                                               1
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    Primary Authors:

    Marissa Castellanos, M.S.W., Bakhita Empowerment Initiative, Catholic Charities of Louisville

    Gretchen Hunt, J.D., Office of Victim Advocacy, Kentucky Office of the Attorney General

    Bethany Gilot, M.S., Florida Department of Children and Families

    Amy Nace-DeGonda, B.A., Bakhita Empowerment Initiative, Catholic Charities of Louisville

    Melody Wray, MSW Student, Asbury University; Intern, Catholic Charities of Louisville




                                                 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

  Amanda Anderson, MSW Student, Indiana University Southeast; Intern, Catholic Charities of Louisville

  Michelle Anderson, Georgia Statewide Human Trafficking Task Force, Criminal Justice Coordinating Council

  Pierce Beckham, Office of Child Safety, Tennessee Department of Children’s Services

  Katherine Chon, Administration for Children and Families, Office of Trafficking in Persons

  Vanessa Chauhan, Polaris

  Jeffrey Fredericks, Office of Regional Operations, ACF Region 4 Office

  Libby Magee Coles, Justice Matters, North Carolina

  Nilda Pedrosa, Deputy Chief of Staff, Florida Attorney General’s Office

  Kate Trudell, Grow Free Tennessee, Community Coalition Against Human Trafficking



  Peer Review provided by: Kate Keisel-Caballero, MSW │CEO, Sanar Wellness Institute

  Special thanks to the National Human Trafficking Training and Technical Assistance Center (NHTTAC) for their
  assistance coordinating the Peer Review for this Guide.

  Thank you also to the Office for Victims of Crime (OVC) for providing review and edits to this Guide.




  Publication: September 2018

                                                                                                          2
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    Table of Contents
    Introduction ...................................................................................................................................... 4
    Resource Considerations .................................................................................................................... 6
    Human Trafficking Laws ..................................................................................................................... 7
    Summary of Guiding Principles ........................................................................................................... 9
    Definitions and Key Terms ................................................................................................................ 10
    Guiding Principles ....................................................................................................................... 13-53


               1) Victim-Centered Approach ...................................................................................................... 13
               2) Empowerment/Strengths-Based ............................................................................................. 16
               3) Trauma-Informed Approach .................................................................................................... 19
               4) Screening ................................................................................................................................. 24
               5) Religious/Spiritual Self-Determination .................................................................................... 26
               6) Confidentiality ......................................................................................................................... 27
               7) Safety ....................................................................................................................................... 31
               8) Non-Discrimination.................................................................................................................. 34
               9) Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate ................................................................................ 37
               10) Collaboration ........................................................................................................................... 40
               11) Ethics and Professionalism ...................................................................................................... 42
               12) Survivor-Informed ................................................................................................................... 47
               13) Evidence-Based Interventions ................................................................................................. 52
               14) Support and Self-Care for Professional Staff ........................................................................... 53
               15) Training for Providers .............................................................................................................. 55


    Final Considerations ........................................................................................................................ 56
    Appendix A: Resource List and Links ................................................................................................. 57
    Appendix B: Resource Documents .................................................................................................... 63




                                                                                                                                                                 3
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
      Guiding Principles for Agencies Serving
      Victims of Human Trafficking
    INTRODUCTION
    The Administration for Children and Families Region 4 Southeast Regional Human Trafficking Advisory
    Group has convened since 2016 to improve coordination and services to survivors of labor and sex
    trafficking. One need identified by the group was to develop a best practices framework to guide and
    evaluate agencies providing services to victims of human trafficking.

    Different states have considered and adopted various mechanisms for improving and regulating agencies
    serving survivors of human trafficking. While this document is not a comprehensive survey of all state
    responses, we have gathered those that are readily available in order to inform our work.

    WHY DO WE NEED BEST PRACTICES GUIDANCE FOR SERVICE PROVISION IN HUMAN TRAFFICKING?
    While working with human trafficking survivors has some overlap with the services needed and the trauma
    experienced by survivors of sexual assault or domestic violence, human trafficking is a specific crime with its
    own challenges in regards to service needs, trauma, policy, funding, and other areas. As such, there is value
    in clearly identifying best practices and providing guidance for service provision as a resource for service
    providers, community partners, funders, and others who serve survivors of human trafficking.


    HOW MIGHT THESE GUIDING PRINCIPLES BE HELPFUL TO YOU?
      • You are already providing services, and want to ensure that you are including best practice
         standards in your work
      • You want to expand your services and programming to include survivors of trafficking
      • You are a funding source interested in providing funding specifically for human trafficking services,
         and you want to fund effective services
      • You are a researcher interested in evaluating the components of best practice services for human
         trafficking
      • You are interested in starting a program to serve survivors of human trafficking


    THE MANNER AND APPROACH OF SERVICE PROVISION DIRECTLY IMPACTS THE LIVES OF SURVIVORS:
    It is important to consider our approach to service provision and to evaluate our motivations for engaging in
    this work. If our motivation is based on improving the lives of survivors of human trafficking, then it is
    important to assess the ways in which we interact with survivors and facilitate services. Ensuring our efforts
    are empowerment-based with the goal of supporting survivors in regaining control of their lives in both big
    and small ways is critical. This may include developing assertive communication skills, which helps to ensure
                                                                                                                  4
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    survivors are in the “driver’s seat” by making their own choices, and feeling supported in those choices. If
    we value survivor strengths and empower them, we will help them gain tools to do more on their own, so
    they are able to succeed in meeting their goals.


     Do we really want to help, and do no harm? If we aren’t carefully assessing the reasons why we provide
    services the way we do, and the ways we interact with survivors, it can be easy to mimic the behavior of
    traffickers, even unintentionally. Traffickers are master manipulators. They know how to convince victims to
    make life choices without considering what’s in their own best interests, but instead to focus on the best
    interests of the trafficker.


    TRAFFICKING VICTIM POPULATIONS ARE INCREDIBLY DIVERSE:
    Anyone can be a trafficking victim, so we should be prepared to serve these populations: individuals with
    disabilities, foreign nationals, individuals who identify as LGBTQ, children and adults, male and female,
    survivors of sex and/or labor trafficking, etc. It’s important to consider the implications of services specific to
    each of these populations. For example, if you are serving foreign national victims of trafficking, you will
    need a language access plan and resources for interpreter/translator services as well as immigration legal
    services. Trafficking victim may also be victims of other crimes as well (domestic violence, sexual assault,
    child abuse, etc), which further highlights the importance of a flexible approach to services that addresses
    the individualized experiences and needs of victims.


    COMPREHENSIVE SERVICES ARE EXTENSIVE: The service needs span from the most basic, immediate needs
    (safety, emergency housing, language access, food, medical care) to long-term needs (therapy services,
    immigration relief, substance abuse treatment, case management services, long-term housing). While one
    agency may not provide all of these services alone, it is important to know that these services are available
    and to coordinate so survivors can access these services.


    USE OF “VICTIM” AND “SURVIVOR” THROUGHOUT THE GUIDE: While there is a lot of difference in opinion
    around when to use the terms “victim” or “survivor”, this guide generally uses the language “victim” when
    referring to the term statutorily or in the early stages of identification or intervention. The term “survivor” is
    typically used otherwise, recognizing the unique space occupied by those who are no longer being
    victimized, but have survived. Best practice in service provision highlights individual autonomy and choice in
    identifying the language an individual who has exited a trafficking situation feels best describes their identity
    and experiences.




                                                                                                                      5
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    RESOURCES:                                                                                           New Service
    There are many governmental departments and not-for-profit organizations engaged in
    anti-human trafficking efforts. Some are specific to law enforcement actions and activities,         Organizations
    some focus on training and awareness, while others are involved in accessing and
    providing services to identified victims and survivors.                                              If you are new to the issue of
                                                                                                         human trafficking or are
    Office for Trafficking in Persons (OTIP)- OTIP is an office in the Administration for                considering becoming a new
    Children and Families, and funds human trafficking training and awareness efforts, as well           service provider, please
                                                                                                         consider the following:
    as victim services. OTIP offers SOAR to Health and Wellness Training for health care
    providers, and also funds the National Human Trafficking Training and Technical
    Assistance Center (NHTTAC)                                                                           •    Are there existing task
                                                                                                              forces or coalitions in your
    Office for Victims of Crime (OVC)- OVC is within the Department of Justice, Office of                     area? If so, consider
    Justice Programs, and funds human trafficking programming throughout the United States                    attending their meetings
    and US territories. Most OVC funding is specific to services for victims of human trafficking.            and joining their list serves,
                                                                                                              so you are well-informed
    OVC also has a Training and Technical Assistance Center (OVC TTAC), which has a
                                                                                                              on existing service
    wealth of resources available online related to services for victims, including the OVC TTAC
                                                                                                              structures, protocols, and
    Task Force E-guide.                                                                                       resources in your area.

    National Human Trafficking Hotline (NHTH): The NHTH (1-888-373-7888) is funded by
    HHS and executed by Polaris, a non-profit organization based in Washington DC. The                   •    Has a needs assessment
    NHTH is a 24/7 hotline for reporting human trafficking and connecting potential victims to                been completed on the
    resources. The National Hotline maintains an extensive list of trained law enforcement and                need for additional
    service providers around the country to ensure that victims/survivors are connected to the                services for human
    best resources in their locality. Polaris also does a lot of work to disrupt trafficking systems          trafficking victims and
    and networks throughout the United States, through the development of resources,                          survivors in your area?
    information, and response systems.                                                                        This will help you to
                                                                                                              ensure that any new
    Project REACH: Project REACH is a program in the Trauma Center at the Justice                             services created are
    Resource Institute of Boston and provides consultation and brief mental health services to                filling a current gap and
    survivors of human trafficking throughout the United States. Project REACH is an excellent                not replicating existing
    resource for training on trauma and mental health, and also provides direct assistance,                   services, but instead
    such as psychiatric evaluations, which may be helpful both in long-term service provision,                leveraging what already
                                                                                                              exists in the provision
    as well as for legal needs, such as a visa application.
                                                                                                              of a needed service.
    Freedom Network USA: Freedom Network USA is a national coalition of human trafficking
    experts from around the United States, advancing a human rights approach to addressing
    human trafficking. The Freedom Network hosts the annual Freedom Network Conference
    which addresses current issues, trends, challenges, and new approaches to addressing human trafficking.

    Shared Hope International: Shared Hope International is a national program, with international reach, focusing on child sex
    trafficking, both domestically and abroad. Shared Hope offers training annually through their JUST Conferences, in addition to
    developing informational resources, working on policy issues, and supporting service work. Shared Hope also addresses
    demand through their Demanding Justice Project, to promote demand deterrence.


                                                                                                                                      6
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    DEFINITIONS OF HUMAN TRAFFICKING1

    The TVPA defines different types of trafficking as:                                                          SINCE 2000, there have been
    • Sex Trafficking: Any commercial sex act on account of which anything of value (money,                      multiple federal anti-
    drugs, shelter, food, clothes, etc.) is given to or received by any person, and in which the
    commercial sex act is induced by the use of force, fraud, or coercion OR in which the person
                                                                                                                 trafficking laws:
    induced to perform the commercial sex act is under the age of 18.
    • Slavery: A form of exploitation where people are legally considered personal property.                     ▪   Victims of Trafficking and Violence
    • Involuntary Servitude: A scheme, plan or pattern that causes a person to believe that if they                  Protection Act of 2000
    do not enter into or continue a labor obligation or situation, they will suffer serious harm,
    abuse, or other negative consequences.
                                                                                                                 ▪   Trafficking Victims Protection
    • Peonage: Peonage is involuntary servitude based upon a real or alleged indebtedness.
                                                                                                                     Reauthorization Act of 2003
    • Debt Bondage: Similar to peonage, debt bondage involves a debt that seemingly can never
    be paid off, forcing the victim into exploitative labor indefinitely.
                                                                                                                 ▪   Trafficking Victims Protection
                                                                                                                     Reauthorization Act of 2005


                                                                                                                 ▪   Trafficking Victims Protection
                                                                                                                     Reauthorization Act of 2008


                                                                                                                 ▪   Trafficking Victims Protection
                                                                                                                     Reauthorization Act of 2013 (Title
                                                                                                                     XII of the Violence Against Women
                                                                                                                     Reauthorization Act of 2013)


                                                                                                                 ▪   Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act
                                                                                                                     The Justice for Victims of Trafficking
                                                                                                                     Act of 2015 states that individuals
                                                                                                                     who purchase sexual acts from
                                                                                                                     human trafficking victims may be
                                                                                                                     arrested, prosecuted, and
                                                                                                                     convicted as sex trafficking
                                                                                                                     offenders when this is merited by
                                                                                                                     the facts of a particular case. It also
                                                                                                                     established the Domestic
                                                                                                                     Trafficking Victims’ Fund, which
                                                                                                                     allows money obtained from
                                                                                                                     arrested traffickers to be given to
                                                                                                                     states to assist victims of
    HUMAN TRAFFICKING LAWS:                                                                                          trafficking.
    The crime of human trafficking involves a trafficker using force, fraud, or coercion to
    make an individual perform labor or engage in commercial sex. Human trafficking
                                                                                                                 ▪   Preventing Sex Trafficking and
    often involves severe violence directed at victims and is often connected to other                               Strengthening Families Act :
    crimes, including gang activity, drug operations, property crimes, organized criminal                            This law, enacted in 2014,
                                                                                                                     strengthens existing laws on child
                                                                                                                     welfare, including additional stage
    1 From OVC TTAC E-guide, available online at:                                                                    actions related to foster care and
    https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/1-understanding-human-trafficking/14-human-trafficking-laws/       adoption. This law recognizes how
                                                                                                                     states’ welfare agencies play a key
                                                                                                                     role in the longer-term7stability and
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking                                             assistance to minor victims of
                                                                                                                     trafficking.
    operations, and other violations of state, federal, and international law. Because of these connections, it is important to
    know how human trafficking laws and other criminal statutes interconnect.
    FEDERAL LEGISLATION:
    The Trafficking Victims Protection Act (TVPA) is the cornerstone of U.S. efforts to combat human trafficking. There
    are three main components of the TVPA – Protection, Prosecution, and Prevention – commonly called the three P’s,
    The TVPA provides protection to victims of trafficking and established the T visa which provides temporary immigration
    status to foreign national victims. The TVPA expands the crimes and penalties available to federal agents pursuing
    traffickers, and enhances U.S. international efforts to prevent trafficking. The TVPA mandated the creation of the Office
    to Monitor and Combat Trafficking within the State Department and has sponsored public awareness campaigns and
    coalition to help implement its policies and programs. The TVPA of 2000 and subsequent reauthorizations created a
    number of additional crimes and remedies and re-codified several pre-existing crimes connected with human
    trafficking. These offenses are generally referred to as Chapter 77 crimes because they appear in Chapter 77 of Title 18
    of the U.S. Code. Chapter 77 laws are some of the main statutes federal prosecutors may use for prosecution of
    human trafficking offenses.



             STATE LEGISLATION:
             “Despite the continuing improvement of the federal response, there was an early recognition that individual
             states have a significant role to play in combating human trafficking. There was also recognition that new laws
             at the state level were needed to provide the foundation for states’ anti-trafficking efforts to grow. Polaris has
             rated all 50 states and the District of Columbia based on 10 categories of laws that are critical to establishing
             a basic legal framework to effectively combat human trafficking, punish traffickers, and support survivors. In
             the final year of our State Ratings on Human Trafficking Laws, the following analysis highlights the
             tremendous improvement and innovation during this time. Yet, while criminal statutes have been enacted
             across the United States, there is still a significant absence of laws to assist and protect victims of human
             trafficking. In addition, the passage of dozens of new laws now requires that states work to provide proper
             funding and support to ensure that these laws can be effectively implemented.

             Since 2003, a number of tools have been developed to assist states in enacting anti-human trafficking laws.
             Polaris released the first edition of its Comprehensive Model State Law in 2004 and published subsequent
             editions in 2006 and in 2010. The Department of Justice also released a model law for states in 2004. Other
             groups released model laws or model legislative provisions for states, including the Freedom Network and the
             Center for Women’s Policy Studies. In 2013, the Uniform Law Commission adopted a Uniform Act on the
             Prevention of and Remedies for Human Trafficking. The Uniform Act was officially endorsed by the American
             Bar Association soon after its adoption and represented a critical step forward in providing states with the
             comprehensive road map necessary to establish effective criminal penalties and victim protections to fight
             human trafficking.”

                  -     Polaris, “A Look Back: Building a Human Trafficking Legal Framework”

             ADDITIONAL STATE LEGISLATION RESOURCES:
             Polaris, State Laws, Issue Briefs, and State Ratings (2011-2014)

             Shared Hope International, Protected Innocence Challenge, State Report Cards (2011-2017 *may issue new reports)

             Northeastern University, Human Trafficking Data Collection and Reporting, State Legislation Proposals (dates unknown)

             National Conference of State Legislatures, Human Trafficking Enactment Database (select by year)


                                                                                                                                     8
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
       GUIDING PRINCIPLES:
         Topic Areas                     Overview of Principles
 1.      Survivor-Centered Approach      Prioritizing the needs and well-being of the survivor in all services.

 2.      Empowerment/                    Acknowledging and focusing on the strengths of the survivor.
         Strengths-Based

 3.      Trauma-Informed Approach        Services are cognizant of the complex traumas of survivors and re-traumatization is minimized
                                         throughout the provision of services. Focus is on doing no harm.
 4.      Screening
                                         Going through the process of determining if an individual meets the definition of a victim of
                                         human trafficking per federal law or relevant state laws. Typically involves completion of a
                                         screening tool through conversation with the potential victim.

 5.      Religious / Spiritual           Religious/ spiritual issues should be included in needs assessment for survivors. There should
         Self-Determination              be transparency and choice for survivors regarding participation in any faith-specific services or
                                         programming.

 6.      Confidentiality                 Ensuring all information relating to a survivor’s case is strictly confidential: when disclosure
                                         may be necessary, informed consent provided by the survivor before release of information.

 7.      Safety                          Developing a plan to prioritize and ensure physical safety of the victim, safety of family
                                         members, and emotional safety as well as risks/benefits with taking legal action, in a
                                         collaborative manner with the victim.

 8.      Non-Discrimination              Providing a full extent of available services to all victims regardless of age, class, color,
                                         disability, ethnicity, family structure, gender identity, marital status, national origin, race,
                                         religion, sex, and sexual orientation.

 9.      Culturally and Linguistically   Being aware and respectful of people’s unique needs based on cultural background and
         Appropriate                     identity while also providing language-specific services for victims.

 10.     Collaboration                   Developing working relationships with interdisciplinary fields in order to provide a
                                         multidisciplinary range of care for victims in an efficient manner.

 11.     Ethics and Professionalism      Articulating and demonstrating the knowledge and skill of one’s professional role and of the
                                         specific needs of human trafficking survivors in order to provide the highest quality of care.

 12.     Survivor-Informed               Incorporating the experience and expertise of survivors and engaging survivors when doing
                                         anti-trafficking work.

 13.     Evidence-Based                  Using research and evaluation to ensure that interventions used to respond to victims/survivors
         Interventions                   are most effective.

 14.     Staff Support and Self-Care     Intentionally creating spaces outside of professional work that enable one to maintain stable
                                         health and prevent burn-out.


 15.     Training for Service            Competent training that gives providers professional knowledge and skills necessary for
         Providers                       serving specifically victims of trafficking most effectively.

                                                                                                                                      9
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS:
    **Many of these key terms and definitions are from the Office for Victims of Crime: Achieving Excellence: Model
    Standards for Serving Victims and Survivors of Crime, which provides guidance to providers working with victims and
    survivors of crime.

    Advocate/ Advocacy- Active support for a cause, person, or policy; to advocate is to speak or act on another’s behalf,
    to intercede; an advocate is one who engages in advocacy. Advocacy may be individual (for a person served) or social
    (directed at changing social systems, institutions, and broader functioning of society). The latter type of advocacy may
    also be called institutional advocacy or systems advocacy.2

    Confidentiality- The rules prohibiting the disclosure of victim information. It limits the disclosure of information
    without the victim’s consent, and requires victim service providers to disclose any limits to confidentiality to the
    victim.

    Case Management- Process of prioritizing, managing, supporting, and providing the services set forth in a
    victim/survivor service plan; this often includes assisting crime victims in coordinating tasks and following up with
    many different systems (e.g., criminal justice, civil legal systems, social services) to meet victim/survivor goals.3

    Collaboration- Partnership between agencies and individuals committed to working together and contributing
    resources to obtain a common goal.4

    Confidentiality- The act of protecting (i.e., not disclosing, revealing, or sharing without consent) private information
    relating to a person served, established through federal and state statutes and regulations, ethical principles, and
    program policies. Confidentiality is rarely absolute, and limitations should be fully disclosed to persons served.5

    Cultural Competence- The ability of an individual or organization to interact effectively with people of different
    cultures. This includes drawing on knowledge of culturally based values, traditions, customs, language, and behavior
    to plan, implement, and evaluate service activities. Some organizations use the terms “cultural accountability” or
    “cultural responsiveness.”6

    Disability- The Americans With Disabilities Act (“ADA”) defines a person with a disability as a person
    who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activity.
    This includes people who have a record of such an impairment, even if they do not currently have a
    disability. The ADA also makes it unlawful to discriminate against a person based on that person’s
    association with a person with a disability7




    2
      Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    3
      Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    4
      Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    5
      Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    6
      Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    7
      ADA National Network, available online at : https://adata.org/faq/what-definition-disability-under-ada
                                                                                                                               10
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    Diversity- Recognition of the vast array of different groups, including those of different races,
    ethnicities, genders, and cultures, that may have varying behaviors, attitudes, values, beliefs, rituals,
    traditions, languages, or histories.8
    Domestic- Refers to a victim or survivor who is a U.S. citizen or Legal Permanent Resident of the United
    States.
    Foreign National- Refers to a victim or survivor who was not born in the United States, and who is not a
    Legal Permanent Resident or U.S. Citizen.
    Interpreter/Interpreting- Provides oral (spoken) translation of a speaker’s words from one language
    into; The act of rendering spoken words from one language into another.9
    Language Access Plan (LAP)- An organizational document that contains a comprehensive set of policies
    and procedures that ensure that limited English proficient individuals will have meaningful access to that
    agency’s programs, services, and products.10
    Limited English-Proficient (LEP)- Individuals who do not speak English as their primary language and
    who have a limited ability to read, speak, write, or understand English. Individuals with LEP may be
    competent in certain types of communication (e.g., speaking, understanding), but have LEP in other
    areas (e.g., reading, writing). Similarly, LEP designations are context-specific; an individual may possess
    sufficient English language skills to function in one setting, but these skills may be insufficient in other
    settings.11
    Multi-Disciplinary- A planned and coordinated program of care involving two or more specializations
    (e.g., law enforcement and a nonprofit service organization) for the purpose of improving services as a
    result of their joint contributions.12
    Privacy- Freedom from unauthorized intrusion; a victim’s right to control who has access to his or her
    own story and personal information.13
    Privilege- Protected communications between certain professionals and victims as defined by statutes.
    Even if it is relevant to a case, a privileged communication cannot be used as evidence in court. The
    established privileged communications are those between wife and husband, clergy and communicant,
    psychotherapist and patient, physician and patient, and attorney and client. In some states,
    communications with domestic violence and sexual assault counselors are included.14
    Re-Traumatization- Intense physical and psychological reactions that occur when a victim’s emotional
    wounds are re-opened or when they anxiously anticipate the re-opening of these wounds. This distress
    may occur when persons are exposed to additional traumatic events or when they find themselves in
    situations that trigger painful memories of past traumatic events. Re-traumatization may also occur


    8
      Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    9
      BABEL LINGUISTICS Inc., Glossary, available online at: http://babel-linguistics.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/Glossary-
    Translation.pdf
    10
       Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    11
       Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    12
       Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html

    13
         Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html

    14
         Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
                                                                                                                                  11
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    when victims re-tell their stories. Victim-centered and trauma-informed approaches are implemented in
    an attempt to avoid re-traumatizing victims while delivering services.15
    Self Determination- The act of making up one’s own mind about what to think or do without
    outside influence or compulsion.16
    Survivor- The term “survivor” refers to foreign and domestic victims of severe forms of trafficking in
    persons as defined by the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000.
    Survivor-Informed- A program, policy, intervention, or product that is designed, implemented, and
    evaluated with intentional leadership and input from victims/survivors to ensure that the program or
    product accurately represents the needs, interests, and perceptions of the target victim population.17
    Translate- The act of rendering written text from one language into another.18
    Trauma-Informed- Approaches delivered with an understanding of the vulnerabilities and experiences
    of trauma survivors, including the prevalence and physical, social, and emotional impact of trauma. A
    trauma-informed approach recognizes signs of trauma in staff, clients, and others and responds by
    integrating knowledge about trauma into policies, procedures, practices, and settings. Trauma-informed
    approaches place priority on restoring the survivor’s feelings of safety, choice, and control. Programs,
    services, agencies, and communities can be trauma-informed.19
    Victim- A person who experiences mental, physical, financial, social, emotional, or spiritual harm as the
    direct result of a specified crime committed on his or her person or property; family members,
    significant others, community members, and others impacted indirectly by the crime are regarded as
    “secondary” victims. The term survivor is also used to describe a direct victim who has survived a violent
    crime or a significant other who has survived a deceased crime victim. Victim assistance providers
    should consult state, tribal, and federal laws for statutory definitions.20
    Victim-Centered Approach- This approach is defined as the systematic focus on the needs and concerns
    of a victim to ensure the compassionate and sensitive delivery of services in a nonjudgmental manner.21




    15
       Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    16
       Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    17
       Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    18
       BABEL LINGUISTICS Inc., Glossary, available online at: http://babel-linguistics.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/Glossary-
    Translation.pdf
    19
       Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    20
       Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
    21
       Office for Victims of Crime, Glossary of Terms, available online at: https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
                                                                                                                                  12
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    1. VICTIM-CENTERED APPROACH:
    A victim-centered approach places emphasis on a victim’s self-determination and seeks to minimize re-traumatization.
    This approach assists in gaining a sense of empowerment while providing information to make informed choices. A
    victim-centered approach is a person-centered approach.

    Any agency serving victims of trafficking should strive to ensure that the individual is provided with information,
    services to stabilize and opportunities to seek justice in the civil and criminal justice systems. The victim's choice, safety,
    and well-being should take priority in all matters and procedures. OVC describes a victim-centered approach as
    “placing the crime victim’s priorities, needs, and interests at the center of the work; providing non-judgemental
    assistance, with an emphasis on client self-determination, where appropriate, and assisting victims in making informed
    choices; ensuring that restoring victims’ feelings of safety and security are a
    priority and safeguarding against policies and practices that may
    inadvertently re-traumatize victims; ensuring that victim’s rights, voices,
    and perspectives are incorporated when developing and implementing                      Victims and survivors
    system- and community-based efforts that impact crime victims.”22
                                                                                          should be given choice in
                                                                                          all matters related to
     EXAMPLE: Providers may inadvertently replicate the behavior of                       their access to services,
     traffickers by insisting that a victim participate in certain activities in
     order to obtain services, telling others about their circumstances
                                                                                          in order to ensure:
     without their informed consent, making information about them
     public in order to sensationalize their experience or fundraise, or by               ➢ The service provider is not
     acting frustrated when a survivor is exercising their choice in a way                  imitating the role or behaviors of
     the provider may not have chosen or agree with personally.                             the trafficker as services are being
                                                                                            provided.
    Safety should be paramount, and the initial issue addressed by                        ➢ The victim/survivor feels
    service providers. Once a victim is safe, they are better-positioned                    empowered and that they
    to utilize services. If there are safety concerns, those concerns                       have control over what is
    should be addressed first, before other services are provided.                          happening in their life.
                                                                                          ➢ All services are provided in a
    Service providers should ensure sufficient time to explain who
    they are, the agency they work for, and their role in service                           way that is meeting the
    provision, while allowing time to address any questions the                             victim/survivor where they
    survivor may have. It’s important to acknowledge and address any                        are, based on their self-
    fears or concerns expressed by the survivor and be patient as they                      identified needs.
    begin their recovery process. Providers should be sensitive to
    cultural differences and language barriers, utilizing an interpreter
    when needed.




    22 OVC TTAC Task Force E-guide, available online at: https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/1-understanding-human-

    trafficking/13-victim-centered-approach
                                                                                                                                13
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
                                                       Social Worker /
                                                        Case Worker




                              Therapist
                                                    Survivor                            Law
                                                                                    Enforcement




                                                            Medical
                                                            Provider




    A visual representation of the victim-centered approach has the survivor in the center of all services, interventions, and
    collaborations. With this approach the survivor is engaged of all facets of care and is the central component of the care
    team. They lead the way and have the final say in all decisions made. Any multi-disciplinary work and collaboration on
    services is done only with the survivor’s consent and engagement.

    A key part of the victim-centered approach is to partner with victim advocates, who should be involved at all stages of
    the case, from the initial report to the investigation to the prosecution. Survivors should be made aware of their rights,
    and those rights should be upheld through all phases of the criminal justice process. The needs of a surivor may last
    well beyond the resolution of a criminal case, underscoring the importance of establishing a strong connection with the
    victim service provider. Recognizing and celebrating successes for program participants and providing opportunities for
    participant feedback and evaluation are also important in ensuring ongoing victim-centered service provision.


      EXAMPLE: When determining how to move forward, each agency may each have a preference regarding survivor
      engage with them or other systems, or specific ideas about decisions a survivor is making. A survivor-centered
      approach encourages and supports a survivor’s self-determination, regardless of a provider’s own personal
      preferences or what may be somehow “best” or more “in line” with agency procedures.


                   “The appearance of having time to listen and time for the person is calming and increases
                      their confidence….There is a lot to be said for a few simple words or expressions of
                            positivity, kindness and recognition of what a victim has been through.”

                        -   Trafficking Survivor Care Standards, The Human Trafficking Foundation

                                                                                                                           14
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    PROVIDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR CHOICE: A coordinated community-wide approach to services will
    provide survivors with different options regarding where they receive services. Offering options in regards
    to shelter, therapy, or case management provides more choice for survivors. Service providers may
    engage in victim-centered practice by simply, yet intentionally, offering choice to victims throughout the
    provision of services. Asking questions such as “Where would you like to meet for our appointment?” or
    “Would you like to sit on that couch or this chair?” or “Would you like something to drink before we
    begin? What would you like?” allow a survivor to practice making simple choices, use their own voice and
    agency, and feel heard and important. These simple questions can also help in grounding the client, if
    they are feeling anxious or are in crisis. By focusing on simple, physical questions related to touch or
    other senses, they may begin to feel more fully themselves, and more comfortable as they engage with
    you as the provider.

      EXAMPLE: It may be risky for a survivor to stay in the same community where they were trafficked. As the
      provider, there are genuine concerns the survivor could be found and re-victimized. Despite these risks, the
      survivor may want to stay in that community because they have plans to work at a local business, their
      children attend a local school, or they aren’t ready for the additional change of moving to another
      community. The service provider should support the survivor’s choice and assist them in safety planning and
      helping them to feel as supported as possible, within their chosen community.

    ENSURING SURVIVORS ARE FULLY INFORMED ABOUT SERVICES: When offering services the provider should
    describe the service with as much detail as may be helpful so that the survivor is fully informed in their
    decision-making regarding services. This may take more time, and the survivor may have a variety of clarifying
    questions, however engaging in this practice starting with the first interaction with a victim will help to ensure
    they know the various options available to them, and are making fully informed decisions. The survivor will feel
    more confident if they know their decisions are fully informed.

       EXAMPLE: A survivor in need of legal services may have various options related to their attorney: an
       attorney who is available immediately, but will cost more; an attorney who charges substantially
       less, but there is a substantial waiting period before the consultation date.

    ENCOURAGING PERSONAL AGENCY: While a service provider may not agree with some choices a survivor in
    their program is making, providers should put the survivor first by ensuring the survivor feels empowered and
    supported as they make their own decisions. As a service provider, we are concerned about a survivor’s safety
    and financial security, however we should whenever possible step back to ensure survivors are making the
    choices they want to make…even when we may disagree or would choose differently for ourselves. The
    primary role of a service provider is to offer information and to support and empower. This role does not
    involve making decisions on behalf of survivors or making them feel badly or second-guessing decisions they
    have made.


     Self-Determination
     Social workers respect and promote the right of clients to self-determination and assist clients in their efforts to
     identify and clarify their goals. Social workers may limit clients' right to self-determination when, in the social
     workers' professional judgment, clients' actions or potential actions pose a serious, foreseeable, and imminent
     risk to themselves or others.
                  -    NASW Code of Ethics, National Association of Social Workers, Ethical Standard 1.02

                                                                                                                            15
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    2. EMPOWERMENT/STRENGTHS BASED:
    “Empowerment is both a theory and a practice. It is also a process as well as an outcome”23

    Empowerment refers to recognizing the power and self-determination of individuals rather than putting the
    provider in the role of “rescuer” who is making choices and decisions on behalf of the victim. The crime of
    trafficking takes away an individual’s sense of control and choice; all interventions should be empowering
    and not replicate this control. Providers should be aware of power dynamics and avoid the repeated
    patterns of control and coercion.24 Survivors are the expert in their lives and have abilities and strengths that
    can assist them in self-advocacy and in
    rebuilding their lives. Providers should         EXAMPLE: Combative behaviors may have helped a victim
    ensure that victims are heard and can            survive their experiences and can be a valuable tool moving
    make choices about which decisions and           forward. The provider and victim should work together to gain
    resources will work for their life,              structure and balance around those behaviors as positive traits.
    recognizing that each survivor is different.
    Giving victims and survivors choices in
    each aspect of their services will help to increase their sense of empowerment. Service providers should
    focus on the strengths of victims and survivors, and how to highlight those strengths when developing goals.
    The role of the provider is to offer options and services- not to take over decision making- and to allow
    clients to make decisions. The goal of empowerment is to encourage victims and survivors to re-claim their
    voice, promote self-sufficiency, and decrease dependence on service providers. Service providers equip
    victims and survivors with the tools, resources, and services that will assist in decreasing their dependence
    on providers.

                              “You should recognize that trafficking is a severe form of exploitation
         that violates survivors’ basic human rights. Therefore, your support should never be contingent upon their
            ability or willingness to cooperate with authorities and should always be offered on an informed and
                 consensual basis with a view to respecting their human dignity and promoting their rights.”

                             -Trafficking Survivor Care Standards, The Human Trafficking Foundation


    Service providers should seek to work in collaboration with survivors and be open to negotiation,
    appreciating the authenticity of the views and aspirations of survivors, although it may be
    challenging to assume such a conjoint position.25



    23 Empowerment and Strengths Based Perspective: Social Work, Reference to Zimmerman, 1995; Gutierrez, DeLois and

    GlenMaye, 1995; Carr, E.S., 2003, available at https://www.studymode.com/essays/Empowerment-And-Strengths-Based-
    Perspective-Social-Work-815954.html
    24 OVC, Training for Working with Survivors of Trafficking, available at www.ovcttac.gov/traffickinglc/dsp_files.cfm (link not

    available to public)
    25
      Saleebey, D. (2013). The Strengths Perspective in Social Work Practice. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
    Education, Inc.
                                                                                                                                     16
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
                                         Integrating Empowerment into Practice


       “The goal of effective practice is not coping or adaptation but an increase in the actual power of the
     client or community so that action can be taken to change and prevent the problems clients are facing.
    Because the effects of powerlessness can occur on many levels, efforts toward change can be directed at
                      any level of intervention or can include multiple levels of intervention.”
                                       -Lorraine Gutiérrez, Linnea GlenMaye, and Kate DeLois



    Empowerment of survivors may be incorporated into programming through:
       ▪ Development of concrete skills for survivors
       ▪ Development of social power with survivors (building relationships, collaborating on services)
       ▪ Recognizing and building on strengths of survivors
       ▪ Use of democratic processes in working with clients (self-determination, choice)
       ▪ Involving program participants in the planning, governance, and implementation of programs
       ▪ Utilizing participatory management techniques (engaging leadership)
       ▪ Creating an organizational structure based on working in partnership with others

    Supports for Empowerment:
       1) Staff Development around utilizing an empowerment approach to services
       2) Enhanced Collaborative Approach
                a. Peer support and intervention to model and correct when needed
       3) Administrative Leadership and Support
                a. Shared value of empowerment among leadership and program staff
                b. Full commitment of leadership to making programmatic decisions based on an
                   empowerment model

                         “One critical element [of empowerment] is gaining awareness of the power
               that exists within any individual, family, group, or community…Empowerment is a method for
                    developing personal and interpersonal power through a process of self-awareness.”
                                           -Lorraine Gutiérrez, Linnea GlenMaye, and Kate DeLois




    The Organizational Context of Empowerment Practice: Implications for Social Work Administration
    Guitierrez, Lorraine; GlenMaye, Linnea; DeLois, Kate
    Social Work; March 1995; 40, 2; Research Library pg. 249




                                                                                                           17
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
                                       Strengths-Based Engagement with Survivors
    Survival questions:
    Given all the challenges you have had to grapple with, how have managed to survive (or thrive)?
    What are you thinking and feeling as you face uncertainties and trials?
    What have you learned about yourself and your world during your struggles?

    Support questions:
    In times of difficulty what people or groups have given you special understanding, support, and guidance?
    Of the people in your life who do you see as exceptional and dependable?
    What associations, organizations, or groups have been especially helpful to you in the past? Do you think you can still rely on
    them for help and sustenance?

    Exception questions:
    There are times in our lives when things are going more smoothly. What is different about those moments?
    In those moments when life felt better and more stable, what about the people and places in your world was distinct or different?
    What parts of your world and your being would you like to recapture, reinvent, or relive?
    What incidents in your life have given you special understanding, resilience, guidance, and hope?

    Possibility questions:
    At this moment, what do you want out of life?
    How would you describe your hopes, visions, and aspirations?
    What people and/or personal qualities are helping you move in these directions?
    What do you like to do? What are your special talents and abilities?

    Esteem questions:
    When people say good things about you, what are they most likely to say?
    What things have you done in your life that make you feel proud?
    What events or people give you genuine pleasure?

    Perspective questions:
    What do you make of your current situation?
    How do you understand, or what kind of sense do you make of your recent experiences, both successes and struggles?
    How do you explain these to yourself, to me, or anyone else?

    Change questions:
    What are your ideas about how things in your life – thoughts, feelings, behavior, relationships, etc. – might change?
    What has worked in the past to bring about a better life for yourself?
    What do you think you should or could do now to make things more satisfying for you? Is there any way I can help?

    Meaning questions:
    What are the essential ideas and values of your meaning system: those things that you unreservedly believe in and value above
    all? Where do these beliefs come from?
    What gives you a sense of purpose beyond the self?
    What part does this play in your everyday life?

    While these questions are not meant to be a direct protocol, they reflect the kinds of concerns and interests that may
    arise and direct your attention during conversations with clients to their strengths.



    The Strengths Perspective in Social Work Practice
    D. Saleebey, 2013



                                                                                                                                      18
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    3. TRAUMA-INFORMED APPROACH:
                                                                                                                  Trauma Impact
    Understanding how trauma affects victims of trafficking will ensure that
    services and communications with victims are trauma-informed and                                              “A program, organization, or task
    trauma-sensitive. A trauma-informed approach will consider the whole                                          force that is trauma-informed
    person and address past traumas also.                                                                         realizes the widespread impact of
    The service provider should have an understanding of the widespread
                                                                                                                  trauma on victims and
    impact of trauma, recognize the signs and symptoms of trauma,                                                 understands potential paths for
    respond by integrating knowledge of trauma in policies, procedures and                                        healing; recognizes the signs and
    practices and actively work to not re-traumatize the survivor.26                                              symptoms of trauma in staff,
                                                                                                                  clients, and others involved with
    SERVICE CONSIDERATIONS: The focus of a trauma-informed approach
                                                                                                                  the system; and responds by
    includes safety of the survivor, trust between provider and survivor, the
    survivor having choice and autonomy of services, collaboration among
                                                                                                                  integrating knowledge about
    service providers and the empowerment of survivors.27                                                         trauma into policies, procedures,
                                                                                                                  practices, and settings. As in the
    Trauma can manifest itself in various ways, such as post-traumatic                                            victim-centered approach, the
    stress disorder, depression, anxiety, dissociative identity disorder,
                                                                                                                  priority is on the victim’s safety
    among others. It is important for service providers to understand the
                                                                                                                  and security and on safeguarding
    impacts of trauma. Understanding the impact of trauma will ensure
                                                                                                                  against policies and practices that
    that the service provider does not trigger or re-traumatize a survivor.
                                                                                                                  may inadvertently traumatize
                                                                                                                  victims.”

          EXAMPLE: Trauma can cause deficits in memory because the
                                                                                                                            Key Concepts:
          brain is often unable to record memory in order and sequence                                               1.   Trauma -informed Care
          after experiencing a traumatic event. This may be the case both
          in recalling past memories of trauma, such as recounting a
                                                                                                                     2.   Safety
          trafficking situation, or also manifest in the present, such as                                            3.   Trustworthiness
          having difficulty keeping track of appointments. Instead of                                                4.   Choice
          becoming frustrated with a client for frequently missing                                                   5.   Collaboration
          scheduled appointments, providers should be mindful of the                                                 6.   Empowerment
          potential underlying causes. The provider can offer to call the
          client prior to an appointment to remind them or help them use
          a date planner to keep track of appointments. The provider can
          also make appointments and meetings easy to attend, by doing                                               -    Harris, M. & Fallot, R.
          home visits or having the appointment scheduled directly before                                                 (2001). Using trauma theory
          or after another appointment.                                                                                   to design service systems.
                                                                                                                          New directions in mental
                                                                                                                          health services, Jossey-Bass,
                                                                                                                          89, Spring
    26 https://store.samhsa.gov/shin/content/SMA14-4884/SMA14-4884.pdf
    27
         http://www.socialwork.career/2014/05/core-principles-of-trauma-informed-care-key-learnings-1-of-3.html


                                                                                                                                           19
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    MENTAL HEALTH IMPACT: Collaboration with mental health providers that are trauma- informed can be
    imperative to providing trauma- informed care and should be provided only with consent from the
    survivor. Trauma-informed service providers have a strong understanding of the experiences of the
    population they are serving, and work from that basic understanding. While knowing about trauma
    impact provides a better understanding of survivor behaviors and service needs, providers may not need
    to know the details of someone’s traumatic experience in order to provide “trauma-informed” services.
    Providers should be careful not to ask unnecessary questions about past traumas, recognizing the risk of
    re-triggering the trauma symptoms. Mental health providers should be in the primary role of working
    with survivors regarding their traumas.

    Communication between the service provider and mental health provider could assist in creating an
    individualized case plan that will meet the comprehensive needs of the survivor in a multi-disciplinary
    way. A survivor may have unique needs that require the service provider to have a deeper insight into
    the manifestation of a particular mental health issue, in order for the provider to interact with the
    survivor in the most trauma-informed, helpful way. While human trafficking service providers are often
    familiar with the prevalence of anxiety disorder, depression, and PTSD among trafficking survivors, other
    disorders such as borderline personality disorder or dissociative disorder are also prevalent among
    human trafficking survivors, and need to be both recognized and better understood by service providers.

    Service providers should strive to be flexible when working with survivors. Trauma can impact the way a
    survivor responds to services. They may experience difficulty sharing their story during the screening
    process and feel overwhelmed. They may begin to withdrawal from services due to the distress
    experienced as a result of sharing their trauma. Providers should be mindful of this and allow the
    survivor’s response to services to determine the way in which services are provided.

                                                                Providers should be mindful of a client’s readiness
      EXAMPLE: A survivor who struggles with Dissociative
                                                                for services. Although a survivor may initially be
      Identity Disorder (DID) may be particularly challenging
                                                                agreeable to services they may eventually decide
      because they may present with one identity to their
      therapist, perhaps even the anchor identity, while in     that they are not ready to engage. Survivors may
      their interactions with the case manager the survivor     not voice this but rather display this by not
      may present as various identities, depending on if they   showing up for appointments or rescheduling
      are in crisis or something has triggered them. Given      numerous times. It is a service provider’s
      the tremendous difficulty in understanding the            responsibility to address this with the survivor and
      nuances of DID, it may be helpful for the mental          identify the underlying reason for this behavior
      health provider and the case manager, with the            (ie. trauma-related forgetfulness, not being ready
      consent of the survivor, to work closely and have a       for services, etc.)
      multidisciplinary release of information to allow them
                                                           Office space arrangement is an important
      to discuss as a team the progress and service needs of
      the survivor.                                        consideration when working with survivors.
                                                           Providers should be careful of any potential
    arrangement that may establish a power differential, such as the provider sitting behind a desk. If the

      EXAMPLE: Spending a few minutes for “grounding” can assist in calming a victim or survivor. The
      National Criminal Justice Training Center offers a sample Grounding Exercise that focuses on the senses.


                                                                                                                 20
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    provider and client are separated by a desk or table, the survivor may feel as though the provider is in a
    position of power and has control. Thought should be given to the proximity between the provider and
    the survivor as well. If providers are too close to the survivor they might feel intimidated and potentially
    be triggered. A trauma-informed approach requires providers be aware of the potential ways in which a
    client might be re-traumatized and make every reasonable effort to avoid re-traumatization.

    Service providers may support survivors through moments that are triggering by having sensory-based
    items available that are specifically designed for hypo or hyper arousal. Sensory items such as play-doh,
    an orange (to peel), orange-scented lotion, a stress ball, or a mint (to chew on) could all be kept in a box
    or on a table where meetings with clients are held, so they can easily access sensory items when needed.

    Being trauma-informed does not mean “going along with” everything the survivor may say or decide they
    want. While self-determination and agency are important, and should be respected, the service provider
    should also be a kind and truthful voice for survivors. Being trauma-informed compliments being victim-
    centered. They are not competing ideas, but when done in a best practice way, compliment one another
    and work together to provide the most supportive, helpful services to survivors.

    HOW TO DELIVER TRAUMA-INFORMED SERVICES:

    Trauma-informed services are likely to adapt and grow over time, to best align with what we know and
    continue to learn about trauma. Utilizing the overarching key concepts related to trauma, services should
    include trauma-sensitive approaches that consider the “interrelation between trauma and symptoms of
    trauma such as substance abuse, eating disorders, depression, and anxiety”, while also recognizing the
    survivor’s need to be respected, informed, connected and hopeful regarding their recovery. 28

    Stigma around mental health may impact a survivor’s willingness to participate in treatment. Education
    regarding the importance of addressing trauma through mental health interventions may help not only
    the survivor, but also their friends and family.


                                                   Trauma-Related Resources
          •    There are many tools for service providers on grounding, emotional regulation, self-soothing using sensory-based
               practices. (Sanar Wellness Institute)

          •    A provider may offer trauma-sensitive yoga classes for survivors (SAMHSA)

          •    Teaching, modeling, and encouraging mindfulness and sensory-based practices such as expressive arts or music.
               (Polaris, Sanar Wellness Institute)

          •    Providers may offer or make referrals for mental health services that are specifically designed to address complex
               trauma histories, such as Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR), Trauma-Focused Cognitive
               Behavioral Therapy (TF-CBT), Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT), Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR),
               Somatic Experiencing (SE), or Narrative Therapy.

          •    Common responses to Trauma and Coping Strategies (The Trauma Center)




    28
      Trauma-Informed Approach and Trauma-Specific Interventions, SAMHSA, available online at
    https://www.samhsa.gov/nctic/trauma-interventions
                                                                                                                                21
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
                                                               Trauma Impact


     While each individual’s experience of trauma may be different, it is important to understand how it can tax the
     individual’s coping resources and lead to the initiation of biologically driven survival strategies. Trauma may be the
     result of a single event (natural disaster, witnessing or experiencing a violent act) or a series of ordeals (long-term
     abuse).

     The majority of trafficking situations are the culmination of many traumatic experiences, most of which are
     untreated. Trauma affects how victims see themselves ("I am helpless," "worthless"), their worldview (the world is
     dangerous, no one can protect me), and relationships ("I cannot trust anyone"). These beliefs affect how victims
     respond to services and the criminal justice system, and underscore the importance of task forces taking a trauma-
     informed approach, not only through service delivery but also throughout the investigation and prosecution process.

     Professional training in trauma and trauma-informed care is essential and strongly encouraged as this training can
     transform the work…The bottom line to all interactions with a victim might look like this:

          “How can I create a situation in which the victim feels safe, makes his or her own choices, and feels understood?”

     Triggering Re-traumatization
     Both the criminal justice and victim services systems can inadvertently re-traumatize. Key triggers to re-traumatization
     include—
          • Feeling a lack of control
          • Experiencing unexpected change
          • Feeling threatened or attacked
          • Feeling vulnerable or frightened
          • Feeling shame

     Taking the active and often public steps necessary to cooperate in a law enforcement investigation, including
     interviewing with law enforcement and prosecutors numerous times, testifying in court, going through preliminary
     hearings, the trial, and appearing at sentencing can retraumatize the victim, even for victims willing and committed to
     going through this process.

     It is helpful to consider the effect of trauma when a victim exhibits behavior that may seem unusual, inconsistent, or
     even aggressive to assist the victim in feeling more in control, less shamed, or less frightened.


     Source: “Treating the Hidden Wounds: Trauma Treatment & Mental Health Recovery for Victims of Human Trafficking” by Heather J. Clawson, Ph.D.,
     Amy Salomon, Ph.D., and Lisa Goldblatt Grace, LICSW, MPH.




                                                                                                                                                22
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
                              Smart Tips for Building and Utilizing a
                                     Trauma-Informed Lens

           ▪   Review agency policies and procedures to identify and remove any that are potentially
               unsafe and harmful to trafficking victims with histories of trauma.
           ▪   Provide education and training of staff, including those working directly with trafficking
               victims as well as other providers in relevant systems of care.
           ▪   Screen for trauma in multiple settings.
           ▪   Ensure safety and meet basic service needs.
           ▪   Build long-term, sustaining relationships and provide opportunities for regaining valued
               social roles.
           ▪   Provide access to trauma-specific treatment services.
           ▪   Specific to adolescents, use group therapy to address skills development, affect
               regulation, interpersonal connections, and competence and resiliency building.
           ▪   Understand the role that culture plays in resiliency and the importance of community
               resources as potentially mediating the trauma experience, particularly for foreign-born
               victims. Engage survivors in programming.
           ▪   Develop alternatives to traditional therapies.
           ▪   Make peer models and supports available
           ▪   Engage survivors in programming
                               _________________________________________

           A trauma-informed approach begins with understanding the physical, social, and emotional
           impact of trauma on the individual, as well as on the professionals who help them. This
           includes victim-centered practices. It incorporates three elements:
                1. Realizing the prevalence of trauma.
                2. Recognizing how trauma affects all individuals involved with the program,
                   organization, or system, including its own workforce.
                3. Responding by putting this knowledge into practice.

           Source: OVC TTAC Task Force E-Guide




                                          -   OVC TTAC Task Force E-Guide


                                                                                                            23
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    4.SCREENING:
    Screening for human trafficking is an important initial component for the provision of services because
    federal and state laws clearly define human trafficking as a specific crime. As such, many programs and
    funding sources are specifically to serve human trafficking victims. A screening must be conducted in
    order for a determination of human trafficking to be made, which addresses the relevant elements
    (action, means, purpose, age of victim) and documents the information, including a determination of
    whether or not the screening resulted in a positive identification of human trafficking. If sufficient
    screening has not been done, a determination of trafficking cannot be made.

    SCREENING APPROACH: All screening should be conducted by a trained professional, who has knowledge
    and experience on how to screen potential trafficking victims and trauma-informed interviewing.
    Potential victims should not be asked to complete a screening form themselves or self-identify as a victim
    by answering a question on a form, such as “Are you a victim of human trafficking?” A direct reference to
    “human trafficking” during the screening process is not best practice. Instead, the focus of the questions
    should be the underlying experiences and facts of how the potential victim was treated and what they
    believed to be true.


                                     Steps for Conducting Human Trafficking Screening:


          1.  Ensure Language Access via In-Person Interpreter, or by phone (if needed)
          2.  Establish Rapport through Initial Conversation
          3.  Provide for Basic Needs of Potential Victim (culturally appropriate snacks and drinks, access to a
              bathroom, comfortable clothing, tissues)
          4. Conduct Screening in a Safe, Private Location
          5. Begin Asking Screening Questions (it is often best to NOT have a list of questions to read through)
          6. Observe Condition and Behavior of Potential Victim throughout Screening
          7. Listen for Potential Indicators in Narrative
          8. Ask for Clarification as Needed
          9. Observe Time Frame and Well-Being of Potential Victim (don’t go too long)
          10. Schedule Another Time to Continue Screening (if needed)
          11. Make Determination of Trafficking (yes or no) When Sufficient Information is Known




    When conducting screening, service providers should be cognizant of the distinction between “wanting to
    know” information and “needing to know”. Providers should only have access to information that is
    essential for them to complete the screening (does their experience meet the definition of trafficking per
    the TVPA or state law?) and assist the survivor in accessing services- nothing more.

     EXAMPLE: A service provider is conducting screening, and in the course of asking questions specific to the use of
     control, the individual being screened begins to provide substantial details of sexual assaults that took place. The
     provider should not write down those additional details that were provided, and should gently let the individual
     know that they don’t need to provide those details. For the purposes of the screening and for services, the important
     detail is the fact that there was a sexual assault.                                                                 24
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    MINIMIZING RE-TRAUMATIZATION DURING SCREENING: The screening process may be very difficult for
    the potential victim. In order to minimize the negative impact screening may have, first determine if you
    are able to access some or all of the screening information you need through other sources. For example,
    if the individual was referred to you by law enforcement, were you provided information already
    indicating that they are a victim of trafficking from the law enforcement officer, or could you request a
    copy of the police report? If the individual was referred by a medical professional, could you request the
    medical record which contains information about the trafficking that took place? Any information you
    already have access to will allow you to ask less questions during the screening process, so as to not
    further traumatize the victim. Multiple screenings should be avoided whenever possible. An identified
    victim may choose to sign a release of information, allowing the provider to share some information
    about their screening as appropriate and needed, to prevent additional screening that may do harm to
    the victim. (Refer to confidentiality and privacy rules regarding related restrictions and additional guidance)

    Although every effort should be made to avoid multiple screenings, survivors should be informed that if
    they are accessing services from different providers, they may have to go through different intakes,
    possibly even additional screening, in order to access those different services. While this should be
    avoided whenever possible, and releases provided that allow information-sharing with the survivor’s
    informed consent, they should understand they may need to share information with other individuals
    when there is collaboration among various providers.




                                           Screening and Assessment Tools

      There are many screening tools available. The tools below provide a variety of options, depending on
      the screening needs, and have been particularly helpful to the authors and contributors of this Guide.

          •    Comprehensive Human Trafficking Assessment [with Questions by Type of Trafficking] (Polaris)


          •    Adult Screening Tool (Office of Trafficking in Persons)


          •    Child Trafficking Screening Tool (Georgia Cares)


          •    Human Trafficking Screening Tool (Florida Department of Children and Families)


          •    Trafficking Victim Identification Tool [for sex or labor trafficking] (VERA Institute of Justice)


          •    Spanish Language Human Trafficking Assessment (VERA Institute of Justice)



                                                                                                                   25
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    5.RELIGIOUS/SPIRITUAL SELF-DETERMINATION:
    Access to religious or spiritual services is often an important part of a
    survivor’s healing. Agencies should follow the survivors’ lead in
    engagement or participation in religious activities or practices.
                                                                                    Federal Guidance for
    AGENCIES RECEIVING FEDERAL FUNDING: Any agency receiving federal
    funding must make sure not to discriminate on the basis of religion, or         Faith-Based Programs:
    require engagement in certain religious activities in order to receive
    services. However, religious and spiritual issues should be addressed along
                                                                                    d) …Organizations, in providing services supported in
    with other issues, such as safety, as part of comprehensive case                whole or in part with Federal financial assistance, and in
    management. This can be done during an initial needs assessment, along          their outreach activities related to such services, should
    with discussion of other needs.                                                 not be allowed to discriminate against current or
                                                                                    prospective program beneficiaries on the basis of
                                                                                    religion, a religious belief, a refusal to hold a religious
       Example: Include in your intake form, or initial needs                       belief, or a refusal to attend or participate in a religious
       assessment, at least one question related to if the victim has a             practice.
       spiritual preference, or if that is something that is important to
       them that they would like to pursue.                                         f) Organizations that engage in explicitly religious
                                                                                    activities (including activities that involve overt
    FAITH-BASED ORGANIZATIONS: Faith-based organizations should                     religious content such as worship, religious
    be transparent about any religious affiliations or programming                  instruction, or proselytization) must perform
                                                                                    such activities and offer such services outside of
    requirements when the program is being discussed initially with a
                                                                                    programs that are supported with direct Federal
    victim. Best practice is for faith-based organizations, even those              financial assistance (including through prime
    who do not receive federal funding, to follow the direction and                 awards or sub-awards), separately in time or
    desires of the victim or survivor in regards to religious or spiritual          location from any such programs or services
    activities.                                                                     supported with direct Federal financial
                                                                                    assistance, and participation in any such explicitly
                                                                                    religious activities must be voluntary for the
                                                                                    beneficiaries of the social service program
                                                                                    supported with such Federal financial assistance.
       “Avoid activities that can ostracize a victim, those that mirror
       the behavior of a trafficker, however unintentionally, by                    i) Referral to an Alternative Provider. If a
       limiting or not offering a victim choices in the recovery                    beneficiary or prospective beneficiary of a social
       process.”                                                                    service program supported by Federal financial
                                                                                    assistance objects to the religious character of an
                        -OVC TTAC Task Force E-Guide
                                                                                    organization that provides services under the
                                                                                    program, that organization shall, within a
                                                                                    reasonable time after the date of the objection,
                                                                                    refer the beneficiary to an alternative provider.
    Faith based agencies should ensure that services are not made contingent
    on participation in certain religious activities. Requiring victims to engage
    in mandated religious activities may inadvertently replicate the control of
                                                                                    Office of the Federal Register, Executive Order 13559,
    the trafficker.                                                                 dated 11/17/10, entitled “Fundamental Principles and
                                                                                    Policymaking Criteria for Partnering with Faith-based
                                                                                    and other Neighborhood Organizations”




                                                                                                                                     26
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    6.CONFIDENTIALITY:
    Confidentiality and victim privacy should be paramount for agencies serving
                                                                                         Guidelines for
    victims of human trafficking to ensure safety, protection of personal information,
    and protect against re-traumatization. The survivor has ownership of their story
                                                                                         Confidentiality
    and the provider does not have the right to share this information without the
                                                                                         Confidentiality is a set of rules
    survivor’s informed consent. Providers should recognize the power imbalance
                                                                                         prohibiting the disclosure of victim
    between provider and victim and how this may impact survivors and information
                                                                                         information. These rules:
    sharing.
                                                                                             •    limit the disclosure of
    INFORMED CONSENT: Though definitions of “informed consent” vary
                                                                                                  information without the
    from state to state and profession to profession, there are some
                                                                                                  victim’s consent
    common considerations, such as the survivor’s ability to understand the                  •    require professionals
    relevant information and previous experience making similar decisions.                        working with the victim to
    Please consult with an attorney and refer to your state’s guidance on                         disclose any limits to said
    informed consent for additional guidance.                                                     confidentiality to the victim.

                                                                                         Keep in Mind:
                                                                                         - The concepts of informed consent
          North Carolina State Bar Statutory Rules of Professional Conduct:
                                                                                             and confidentiality are often new to
      In North Carolina, a lawyer “must make reasonable efforts to                           victims.
      ensure that the client…possesses information reasonably adequate                   - It is important to review documents
      to make an informed decision”. Ordinarily, this requires                               related to these concepts on a
      communicating to the client:                                                           consistent basis.
                                                                                         - Signed consents should be narrow in
      -     The “facts and circumstances giving rise to the situation”,
                                                                                             scope and time-limited.
      -     An explanation of the “advantages and disadvantages” of disclosing
            the information,
      -     A discussion of “options and alternatives”, and                                  Even when a consent form is signed,
      -     In some circumstances, a recommendation to seek the advice of                    it is useful to remind the victim
            another attorney.                                                                verbally of this fact prior to sharing a
                                                                                             new piece of information with an
      Whether or not the information provided is “reasonably adequate”
                                                                                             outside agency. This reminds victims
      depends on the sophistication of the particular person who must
                                                                                             of their choices and control over their
      make an informed decision, and therefore varies from client to
                                                                                             story and personal information,
      client. The “relevant factors” to make this determination include:
                                                                                             while reassuring victims that their
      -     Whether the client is “experienced in legal matters generally”,                  dignity and trust is imperative to a
      -     Whether the client is “experienced in making decisions of the type               positive, collaborative relationship.
            involved”, and
      -     Whether the client is represented by an attorney in giving the consent.
                                                                                         Source: OVC TTAC Task Force E-Guide
            North Carolina State Bar,
            Rules of Professional Conduct, Rule 1.0, Cmt. [6]




                                                                                                                       27
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    Human trafficking victims have pronounced interests in privacy as do the
    organizations and task forces that serve them. For human trafficking victims, the
    need for autonomy and control over their body, the private details of her/his life,
    and the decisions that must be made relative to the crime (including whether             The Limited
    and how to assist with a criminal prosecution of their trafficker) are often
    essential to recovery. Survivors are often at risk of future exploitation,
                                                                                             Exceptions in
    prosecution for crimes (even if committed in connection with their victimization),
    and losing their children to child protective services or in a custody battle with the
                                                                                             Privacy Law:
    child’s father/trafficker.                                                               There are limited exceptions to
                                                                                             confidentiality and privilege
    EXAMPLE: Even if a survivor agrees to share their story publicly, they                   protections…Providers and law enforcement
                                                                                             need to understand the specific rules,
    might not feel like they have a choice. A survivor may feel compelled to
                                                                                             policies, and procedures that apply to their
    share their story publicly if requested by the service provider as a way of              position within their organization. Revealing
    “re-paying” the provider for their help or because of cultural practices that            confidential information should never be
                                                                                             done lightly and without a clear intention.
    require deference. Best practice would be for a provider to not approach a
                                                                                             Improper releases can be a violation of state
    survivor about sharing their story publicly while they are still receiving               or federal law and result in severe penalties,
    services from the provider, and to be very cautious even after services                  such as revocation of professional licensure.

    have concluded since certain statutory and ethical duties might still apply.             Signed Release: Victims can choose to permit
    For example, certain professional licensure boards restrict a provider’s                 the release of confidential and/or privileged
                                                                                             information. Service providers…should work
    ability to ask for “testimonials” from current and former clients or others
                                                                                             to create release forms that allow limited
    vulnerable to “undue influence”.                                                         information sharing that will be beneficial for
                                                                                             the victim. Forms should include notification
                                                                                             to the victim that the release can be revoked
                                                                                             at any time and should describe the type of
         LENS 1:     Guiding Principles                                                      information to be shared and the purpose.
     • Recognize that each survivor- and situation- is unique,
      and assess accordingly.                                                                Mandatory Reporting Laws: If you are a
      • Should I ask the survivor to share his/her story?                                    mandatory reporter of abuse of children and
                                                                                             vulnerable adults in your state, there is no
      • Did the survivor give informed consent?
                                                                                             requirement to obtain a release when
                                                                                             reporting information. It is necessary to
         LENS 2:      Professional Restrictions                                              notify the victim at the onset of your service
     • Follow professional and agency-specific processes                                     provision that you are a mandated reporter
      regarding informed consent (forms, conditions, etc.)                                   and what areas require a report. If you have
     • I don't have informed consent. Sharing information is                                 questions about mandatory reporting, check
      not permitted.                                                                         with your supervisor or your agency’s
                                                                                             attorney.

         LENS 3:      Other Factors                                                          State Laws Requiring a Duty to Warn: Some
     • Power differential                                                                    states require service providers to report a
                                                                                             client’s detailed and specific plans to harm
     • Cultural differences
                                                                                             themselves or another person to the police
     • Diminished capacity
                                                                                             or the intended victim of a threat of harm. In
     • Professional humility                                                                 that case, the report would be an exemption
     • Unique challenges                                                                     to the confidentiality requirements.

    Source: Justice Matters North Carolina

                                                                                                  -    OVC TTAC Task Force E-Guide
                                                                                                                             28
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    Sharing personal information without informed consent can be a violation of professional ethics or law by the provider
    and traumatizing for the victim. Confidentiality helps the victim feel safe when receiving medical attention or working
    with a service provider.29


    Providers should clearly outline rights and responsibilities of both the victim/survivor and service provider
    when it comes to confidentiality to ensure the victim fully understands that a provider could be
    required/mandated to share information, and under what circumstances. This helps ensure that a
    survivor can make informed decisions about what information to share. Service providers should explain
    that everything discussed between the survivor and the provider will remain confidential unless it falls
    under a duty to report or the provider is otherwise required to disclose it, ie. by court order (subpoena).



    EXAMPLE: A signed release of information should be on file with the service provider for any
    collaborative partners working with a survivor, both agencies and individuals. The release should
    clearly outline what information is covered by the release, and providers must insure they comply
    with those boundaries. Survivors should be clearly informed about the purpose of the release and
    providers should answer the survivor’s questions; before being requesting the survivor sign the
    release. Before signing an inter-agency release, the survivor and signatory agencies should be aware
    of each agency’s confidentiality requirements as different agencies have different requirements, and
    different levels of protection from mandated disclosure by subpoena. (Share information between
    agencies might put the client at risk.)


    THE IMPORTANCE OF PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY:
    Survivors are entitled to respect of their privacy by service providers. Providers should not post
    pictures, release details, or share the story of a survivor without the survivor’s informed consent.
    This applies to all forms of communication, whether audio or visual- from communicating with
    donors at fundraising events to communicating with the public via social media, from displaying
    photos of survivors in the provider’s office to sharing information in media interviews.



       EXAMPLE: Instead of posting a picture of a person arriving to
       your organization, post a picture of the stack of donations you
       received to serve survivors in the program.




    29 OVC TTAC Task Force E-Guide, available online at:

    https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/3-operating-a-task-force/32-information-sharing/maintaining-
    confidentiality/
                                                                                                                         29
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
                                                                              The Limited
    SUBPOENAS: Anticipate a subpoena, a court order to produce
    documents or appear in court and testify. Survivors often present         Exceptions in
    with a combination of civil, criminal, and/or immigration legal issues.   Privacy Law (cont.):
    (For example, a trafficker or child protective services might seek
    custody of a survivor’s child, a survivor might have committed            Subpoenas: Subpoenas are often used by defense
                                                                              attorneys to try to get confidential victim
    criminal acts related to their victimization, or a survivor might be      information from a victim directly or through a
    undocumented). Opposing parties ask judges to issue subpoenas in          service provider. Recipients have a right to challenge
                                                                              and may be able to terminate the subpoena.
    order to obtain information they can use against the survivor in legal    Service providers should have an established policy
    proceedings. Generally, if subpoenaed, a survivor’s lawyer can            and procedure for responding to subpoenas
                                                                              regarding trafficking victims.
    refuse disclosure by claiming privilege, but other providers must
    hand over certain documents and/or testify in court. If subpoenaed,
    a provider may seek representation by their own attorney, provided        Warrants: Cross-training between law enforcement
                                                                              and victim service providers can help both groups
    by their employer, to attempt to quash the subpoena or represent          better understand their roles and confidentiality
    them in any legal proceedings.                                            requirements. Using a warrant to try to force a
                                                                              victim service provider to breach confidentiality can
    When sharing information, providers should keep in mind that some         have a chilling effect on many victims in a
                                                                              community, causing some to be afraid to talk to the
    have a strong defense to a subpoena, while other providers have           victim service provider. Warrants can be challenged
    weak or no defenses to a subpoena. Sharing information between            in court, literally putting law enforcement and
                                                                              service providers in an adversarial position. Often,
    providers can destroy a defense to a subpoena. For example, a             law enforcement can get the information they need
    survivor’s communication with their attorney is generally                 from another source, such as a neighbor, a hospital,
                                                                              or another party, without involving the victim. Task
    considered “privileged” and disclosure cannot be compelled in court       forces that develop protocols for information
    proceedings. However, if the survivor or attorney shares privileged       sharing are less likely to face these issues.
    information with a third party such as a case manager or therapist,
                                                                              Funders, researchers, evaluators, stakeholders, and
    the information might no longer be considered privileged and a            others viewing non-identifying demographic and
    defense attorney or prosecutor could compel its disclosure.               aggregate information: Funders, researchers, and
                                                                              other individuals, such as stakeholders, may be
                                                                              allowed to see non-identifying compiled data,
      EXAMPLE: A provider may be subpoenaed to appear for a                   redacted records, policies and procedures, or a
                                                                              sample training victim folder, as long as it is
      deposition with the trafficker’s attorney, in relation to a civil       aggregated or the victim gave specific, time-limited,
      lawsuit. The civil lawsuit was brought by the provider’s client,        written informed consent. Task forces should
                                                                              discuss any evaluation or research projects to
      so the client may want the provider to be deposed, as the               ensure that all members understand the
                                                                              confidentiality protections in place and ensure that
      information obtained by the provider may help their case
                                                                              victim privacy is maintained. See Section on 3.2 Data
      significantly. If there are safety concerns, or concerns about a        Collection & Analysis.

      deposition of the provider harming the case or the client in
      some way, an attorney could attempt to squash the subpoena                   -     OVC TTAC Task Force E-Guide
      to keep them from being deposed. If the deposition proceeds
      the attorney would represent the provider at the deposition.



                                                                                                               30
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    7. SAFETY:
    Safety of survivors should be paramount but should be balanced with
                                                                                     Safety Tips after
    agency and empowerment. Victims are in the best position to know their           Exiting a Human
    safety risks, what has worked and has not worked in the past to ensure
    safety, and providers should be careful about taking away choices from           Trafficking Situation
    survivors in the name of their “safety”. Providers should work closely with
    victims to develop safety plans that include physical safety, safety of family   •   Keep your residence locked at all times.
    members, and emotional safety planning as well as risks/benefits with taking         Consider changing your locks if the
    legal action. Addressing safety, safety plans, and survivor’s choice of safety       controller has a key or may be able to access
    may need to be the most immediate issues to address relative to other                your residence.
                                                                                     •   If moving to a new residence, only disclose
    planning due to the survivor’s stress if they don’t feel safe, which may make
                                                                                         your address to people that you trust and
    it difficult for the survivor to focus on other services or goal-setting.            consider accessing the Address
                                                                                         Confidentiality Program (ACP).
                                                                                     •   Consider taking out a protective order
    EMOTIONAL SAFETY: A survivor may experience not only physical                        against the controller so that he/she will be
    safety concerns but also emotional. Service providers should create                  legally prohibited from contacting you.
    safety plans for all safety concerns, as needed. Safety concerns                 •   If the controller has made unwanted
    could include the fear of a trafficker finding the survivor or being                 contact, document the contact made (calls,
                                                                                         texts, showing up at your work/home, etc.)
    physically harmed by the trafficker or their associate, being
                                                                                         and save any voicemails and text messages
    threatened with physical harm, or threats of harm to loved ones.                     that are threatening in nature.
    Providers should understand that safety concerns can vary                        •   Consider changing your phone number to a
    substantially, and they may encounter a safety concern that they                     number unknown by the controller. Most
    have not yet addressed previously, as each person is motivated in                    cell phone carriers will allow you to change
    different ways. Traffickers may use emotional means of controlling a                 numbers at no cost, but will seldom allow
                                                                                         you to block a particular number.
    victim, therefore it’s important to include as a safety issue.
                                                                                     •   Keep a cell phone or emergency phone on
                                                                                         you at all times.
                                                                                     •   Develop a special signal (lights flickering on
      EXAMPLE: A survivor may be physically separated from their                         and off, code word, code text message,
                                                                                         hand signal, etc.) to use with a trusted
      trafficker, however the trafficker may continue to call or text
                                                                                         neighbor, relative, friend or service provider
      them. The survivor and service provider can plan safe ways to                      to notify them that you are in danger or
      respond to the communication and identify additional                               need help. This can be the same safety
                                                                                         signal used while exiting the situation or
      supports for the survivor for their emotional safety.                              something new.
                                                                                     •   If you have children who were also in the
                                                                                         trafficking situation, create a safety plan
                                                                                         with them making sure they know what do
                                                                                         if the controller makes unwanted contact
                                                                                         and how to call someone for help. If your
                                                                                         child still has ongoing contact with the
                                                                                         controller, discuss with your child a safety
                                                                                         plan and how to keep themselves safe while
                                                                                         with the controller.

                                                                                         - Safety Planning and Prevention for Human
                                                                                         Trafficking At-A-Glance, Polaris
                                                                                                                         31
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    SAFETY OF PROVIDERS: Agencies and organizations should develop internal protocols regarding safety for
    staff working with victims and survivors. Providers should be aware of the safety issues while in their
    office, in the community, transporting clients and if there is the possibility of the provider being in contact
    with or physical proximity to the trafficker.


     EXAMPLE: Service providers may meet with clients in their residence. Providers should
     discuss with their clients any possible risks before doing a home visit. Providers should
     make other staff aware of where and who they will be meeting with, as well as the
     time and expected length of the visit. The provider may also be prepared to text a
     predetermined code word to a colleague if there is a safety concern and plan to check
     back in with their colleague at a certain time.

    SAFETY PLANNING: Due to the level of risk for possible retribution by traffickers, trauma-related risk
    factors, risk related to culture, substance abuse issues, and the potential for “unknown” risk or danger to
    present in trafficking-related situations, safety planning is an important tool for use in anticipating and
    taking strategic steps to prevent and reduce the risk of harm for victims and survivors. Service providers
    should be trained on safety planning, and utilize safety planning tools with survivors to manage risk and
    help ensure safety for survivors.




                                                                                                  Safety Planning
       “Safety planning refers to formal or informal risk assessments,                              Resources:
       preparations, and contingency plans designed to increase the safety                 ▪    National Human Trafficking
       of a human trafficking victim or an individual at-risk for human                         Resource Center - Safety
       trafficking, as well as any agency or individual assisting a victim.                     Planning and Prevention

                                                                                           ▪    Victim Rights Law Center -
       A successful safety plan will:
                                                                                                Safety Planning with Adult
            1) Assess the current risk and identify current & potential safety concerns;
                                                                                                Sexual Survivors: A Guide
            2) Create strategies for avoiding or reducing the threat of harm;
                                                                                                for Advocates and
            3) Outline concrete options for responding when safety is threatened or
               compromised.
                                                                                                Attorneys


       Safety planning is important at various stages in a human trafficking               ▪    Rape, Abuse, and Incest
       situation – while a victim is in the situation, during the process of                    National Network – Safety
       leaving, and once the victim has left.”                                                  Planning

                                                                                           **The above resources are not a one-
       -Safety Planning and Prevention for Human Trafficking At-A-Glance, Polaris          size-fits all strategy for safety
                                                                                           planning, nor are they a guarantee of
                                                                                           safety for the trafficking survivor.




                                                                                                                              32
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    SAFETY FOR FOREIGN NATIONAL VICTIMS AND THEIR FAMILIES: Immigration legal services is often one of
    the most important services for foreign national victims. Best practice is to assess at the outset if there is
    a need for immigration legal services and make a referral quickly to a qualified immigration attorney, who
    can provide a consultation to them. In additional to immigration relief, there may be other safety
    concerns related to possible deportation or the safety of family members in the home country.

    Undocumented foreign nationals should be provided with a card or letter that explains that they are in
    the process of applying for immigration relief, with the name and phone number of their attorney, in case
    they are stopped by law enforcement for any reason. There should also be a statement explaining that
    they will not speak without an interpreter if they are not proficient in English.

    Foreign nationals may also have concerns about an immigration raid or being detained or deported as a
    result. Safety planning in case of a raid can be very important to the physical and mental health of a
    foreign national victim and can be provided to them by their service provider or immigration attorney.
    Providing information about how to respond in the case of a raid, is incredibly valuable information to
    have in advance of a raid happening.


       EXAMPLE: When a survivor is undocumented, it is important to provide “Know Your Rights
       Information” and refer the survivor to an immigration attorney. Additional safety planning can be
       done using a “Family Plan” or “Raid Preparedness Checklist” to help the family plan in case
       themselves or a family member is picked up and detained for immigration reasons.
        - Maxwell Street Legal Clinic (documents available in English and Spanish)




    In some cases, the family members of a foreign national victim are at risk of harm in their home country.
    An immigration attorney is a valuable tool in addressing those concerns through immigration relief for
    those family members as well. An additional resource that may potentially assist the family while still in
    their home country is the International Organization for Migration. Family reunification may be a priority
    in those cases, but can be time-consuming and resource intensive. Collaboration is often vital.




             Additional Resource Links for Immigrant Rights, Safety, and Family Reunification:

                 •    United We Dream
                 •    Catholic Legal Immigration Network (CLINIC)
                 •    International Organization for Migration, Counter-Trafficking and Protection Unit




                                                                                                               33
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    8.NON-DISCRIMINATION:
    Non-discrimination is a core principle and value that should be embedded in both policy and culture at
    agencies serving victims and survivors of human trafficking. Victims from marginalized groups may be at
    higher risk for being trafficked, and programs should work to ensure that all obstacles to service delivery
    are removed. Policies, signage and activities should reflect principles of non-discrimination. Programs
    should follow all relevant federal, state and local non-discrimination laws and should take steps to ensure
    that staff are trained appropriately and survivors are aware of non-discrimination policies and their rights
    under such policies.

    The following section provides more in-depth information regarding three areas of non-discrimination in
    federal law: language access, disability access and services to LGBTQ individuals under the Violence
    Against Women Act. This is not an exhaustive list of all non-discrimination laws or vulnerable, protected
    populations.

    LANGUAGE ACCESS: Federal laws particularly applicable to language access include Title VI of the Civil
    Rights Act of 1964, and the Title VI regulations prohibiting discrimination based on national origin.
    Additionally, Executive Order 13166 “Improving Access to Services for Persons with Limited English
    Proficiency” requires federal agencies to examine the services they provide, identify any need for services
    to those with limited English proficiency (LEP), and develop and implement a system to provide those
    services to LEP persons can have meaningful agencies will provide meaningful access consistent with,
    and without unduly burdening, the fundamental mission of the agency. The Executive Order also requires
    that federal agencies work to ensure that recipients of federal financial assistance provide meaningful
    access to LEP applicants and beneficiaries.

    To assist federal agencies in carrying out these responsibilities, the U.S. Dept. of Justice has issued a Policy
    Guidance Document, “Enforcement off Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964- National Origin
    Discrimination Against Persons with Limited English Proficiency” (LEP Guidance). This LEP Guidance sets
    forth the compliance standards that recipients of Federal financial assistance must follow to ensure that
    their programs and activities normally provided in English are accessible to LEP person and thus do not
    discriminate on the basis of national origin in violation of Title VI’s prohibition against national origin
    discrimination. 30




         Sample Language Access General Policy Statement:

         “It is the policy of this agency to provide timely meaningful access for LEP persons to all agency programs and activities.
         All personnel shall provide free language assistance services to LEP individuals whom they encounter or whenever an
         LEP person requests language assistance services. All personnel will inform members of the public that language
         assistance services are available free of charge to LEP persons and that the agency will provide these services to them.”

         Source: Language Access Assessment and Planning Tool for Federally Conducted and Federally Assisted Programs,
         Civil Rights Division, U.S. Department of Justice



    30
         Limited English Proficiency (LEP), A Federal Interagency Website, www.lep.gov
                                                                                                                            34
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    ACCESS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH A DISBILITIY: Agencies covered by the Americans with Disability Act should
    ensure that services are accessible to persons with physical and intellectual disabilities. Even agencies
    not covered by the ADA should be accessible, given that human trafficking affects all communities,
    including people with disabilities. Persons with disabilities comprise an estimated 15% of the world’s
    population, and they deserve special attention in addressing the crime of human trafficking.31

     EXAMPLE: An individual on the autism spectrum may not recognize when they are being recruited by a
     potential trafficker, due in part to challenges they may experience regarding attention to, and
     interpretation of, social interactions.



    A DISABILITY MAY BE A RISK FACTOR FOR BEING TRAFFICKED: Traffickers may target victims to exploit their
    disability for profit. The stigma and marginalization of a person with disabilities creates a particular
    vulnerability. The commonly held view that persons with disabilities are not sexually active or may not be
    knowledgeable of healthy sexual relationships or consent, increases the risk of sex trafficking for persons
    with disabilities.


                         “The very factors that challenge people living with disabilities to take an active role in
                            their communities are the same ones that make them attractive to traffickers.”
                                                             -World Vision



    LACK OF EQUAL TREATMENT BY GOVERNMENT AGENCIES MAY INCREASE VULNERABILITY:
    Societal barriers limit the access of persons with disabilities to systems of justice. Lack of training of
    police, prosecutors, and judges on how to accommodate persons with disabilities (through, for example,
    sign language interpreters, plain language, and physical access) can leave victims with disabilities unable
    to provide effective statements and report the abuse they have endured. Where schools fail to
    accommodate students with disabilities, high drop-out rates leave them on the streets and at much
    higher risk of being trafficked in forced begging or other criminal activities.32


         EXAMPLE: “The Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013 added a civil rights provision that applies to all
         OVW grants issued in FY2014 or after. This provision prohibits recipients of OVW awards from excluding or denying
         benefits to or discriminating against any person on the basis of actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin,
         sex gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability in any program or activity funded in whole or in part by OVW. The
         recipient acknowledges that it will comply with this provision. The recipient also agrees to ensure that any
         subrecipients (“subgrantees”) at any tier will comply with this provision.”
             -    Department of Justice Grant Solicitation Special Condition (2016)




    31
       World Health Organization, World Report on Disability, available online at:
    http://www.who.int/disabilities/world_report/2011/report/en/
    32 U.S. Department of State, Trafficking in Persons Report 2014, p.10

                                                                                                                             35
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    VICTIMS WITH DISABILITIES MAY NOT SEEK SERVICES DUE TO BARRIERS. The physical and attitudinal
    barriers that confront people with disabilities may further hamper the ability of victims with disabilities to
    receive the assistance they require and are entitled to. Exploitation involving individuals with disabilities
    may be under identified due to communication barriers, and lack of identification of vulnerabilities
    specific to a particular disability.


     EXAMPLE: If an individual with a physical disability requiring use of a wheelchair must navigate equipment, such
     as a lift, in order to enter a building, this may deter them from seeking services at that physical location, due to
     needing additional assistance to operate the equipment or being unsure how to operate the lift.


    HUMAN TRAFFICKING AND RESULTING TRAUMA MAY BE A CAUSE OF DISABILITY. Even in instances in
    which victims of trafficking do not have disabilities initially, the experience of being trafficked
    substantially increases the risk of victims acquiring temporary or permanent disabilities as a result of
    physical and psychological trauma. Providers should assess for disability in the intake process, and be
    prepared to offer support and resources, either in house or through referrals, in regards to trauma-
    related disabilities.

    ACCESS FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO IDENTIFY AS LGBTQ: There are several areas of federal guidance
    regarding non-discrimination based on gender identity and sexual orientation. While some federal
    policy is specific to housing or employment, other federal agencies are in the process of determining
    if these policies should be adopted across the board. Movement Advancement Project provides
    maps specific to locations and issues regarding LGPTQ access and non-discrimination. In addition,
    many states and local governments may have Fairness Ordinances requiring non-discrimination at
    those levels.


                                    BEST PRACTICE TIPS FOR INCLUSIVE INTERVENTION:
          • Do not make assumptions about a person’s abilities based on his/her appearance. Ask the person what
             support they need from you.
          • Use inclusive language. Let the person direct you in regards to how they identify, and their preferences
             regarding language choice and identity.
          • Be patient and respectful. Address the guilt and shame that the individual may have. Try to give the person
             back control and choices. Give information about safety and who to call for assistance in the future.
          • Be concrete when communicating with people with cognitive disabilities. Ask “who” “what” and “when”
             questions rather than “how” and “why” questions. Break instructions into small steps. Use pictures,
             drawings or dolls to demonstrate what you are trying to communicate. Ask for understanding before
             moving on.
          • Use a competent, independent interpreter. Be aware that a caregiver or guardian could be connected to
             traffickers and is not competent to give unbiased interpretation.
          • Involve disability rights advocates in task forces and other anti-trafficking efforts, including outreach,
              training and awareness raising events.



                                                                                                                            36
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    9.CULTURALLY AND LINGUISTICALLY APPROPRIATE:
    Each human trafficking case, and each victim, has unique needs. Individuals
    should be treated with respect and compassion, and in a culturally and
    linguistically appropriate manner. Victims from underserved groups, including
    but not limited to LGBTQ victims, victims from rural areas, immigrants, and
    members of indigenous groups should be given appropriate services and
    support.

    CULTURAL COMPETENCE: Cultural competence requires continuous                    Language Access
    effort to gain knowledge and understanding, not only about a victim’s
    specific culture, but also the broader nuances of cultural differences
                                                                                    and Federal Law
    and interaction across cultures. This is not limited to languages, but          Providers have legal obligations to
    includes cultural norms, symbols, strengths, and mannerisms. The                establish language access plans and
                                                                                    offer access to interpreters.
    combination of a person’s values and beliefs are central to their
    functioning and cooperation in the recovery process.5 Professionals             Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
    working with victims who identify with specific cultures should strive          prohibits recipients of federal financial
    to be knowledgeable of those cultural attributes. However, because              assistance from discriminating based on
                                                                                    national origin by, among other things,
    victims come from diverse backgrounds, cultural competency also                 failing to provide meaningful language
    requires collaboration and expertise from other professionals who               access to individuals who have LEP.
    focus on specific cultures and can provide those resources. Service
                                                                                    In addition, many state and local
    providers should understand that while cultural competence is not so            ordinances mandate language access,
    much a goal that can be obtained, it is an important concept to work            and task forces need to comply with
    towards and utilize as a lens in working with culturally diverse                such requirements. It is important for task
                                                                                    forces to plan how they will ensure that
    populations.                                                                    trafficking victims with LEP can properly
                                                                                    access services and can accurately
                                                                                    and safely report their cases to law
                                                                                    enforcement.


      “Cultural Competence requires that organizations have:                        It is particularly important to develop
                                                                                    language access plans that detail how
      A defined set of values and principles, and demonstrate behaviors,
                                                                                    to access interpreters. Aside from legal
      attitudes, policies, and structures that enable them to work effectively      obligations, it is important that the
      cross-culturally; have the capacity to                                        information gleaned from trafficking
       1) value diversity                                                           survivors and other witnesses is obtained
                                                                                    through a neutral interpreter so that
      2) conduct self-assessment
                                                                                    there can be no confusion (or later
      3) manage the dynamics of difference                                          arguments) that the information
      4) acquire and institutionalize cultural knowledge, and                       obtained was inaccurate because of
      5) adapt to the diversity and cultural contexts of individuals, families,     biased interpretation.
      and communities they serve.”
                                                                                    Developing a language access plan
                                                                                    beyond a telephonic language line is
               -National Center for Cultural Competence-                            important. While telephonic language
                                                                                    lines are helpful and useful, they limit the
                                                                                    ability of the interpreter to assess facial
                                                                                    and body language as well as connect
                                                                                    with the trafficking survivor using
                                                                                    nonverbal cues to facilitate the most
                                                                                    accurate form of interpretation.
                                                                                                                   37
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
                                                                                        -    OVC TTAC Task Force E-Guide
    CULTURAL HUMILITY: Cultural competence has the potential to do harm when professionals take on the role of expert
    without the consideration of a victim’s specific needs that are unique to their personality and background, despite
    what is common in their culture. Because of this, and the impossibility of being competent in all cultural backgrounds, it
    is imperative that this skill work alongside cultural humility. Cultural humility approaches victims with understanding,
    while cultural competency reflects knowledge. Professionals must be aware of their limitations in terms of knowledge
    and be willing to listen and understand the victim as an expert on her or his own life and cultural background. To be
    culturally humble also requires that service providers recognize their own cultural biases, being aware of the influence
    of culture in one’s own life in order to effectively learn, communicate, serve, and do no harm to victims.33


                                  “Cultural humility deals with understanding, whereas cultural
                                               competence reflects knowledge.”

                                                       -Van Wormer and Besthorn


    THE BASICS: Terminology and language are important tools, and can cause damage when not used
    properly, particularly when it comes to terminology related to a person’s identity- their basic sense of
    self. Service providers are responsible for having basic knowledge about terms and their proper use
    before they are able to engage in culturally appropriate service provision, as well as following each
    client’s guidance in regards to the terminology and language with which they personally self-identify.



      Term             Culture                    Ethnicity                        Race                         Nationality
      Definition       Identity based on          Cultural group or                Based on real or             The relationship
                       ideas, customs,            identity based on                perceived biological         between a person
                       and social behavior        common ancestry,                 differences; physical        and a country;
                       of a group of              language, religion,              characteristics of a         identifying with a
                       people                     cultural tradition, or           common, shared               person’s country
                                                  place of origin.                 heritage or genetics         of origin or
                                                                                                                citizenship

      Example          LGBTQ, Middle              Italian American, Irish,         African American,            Chinese, Mexican,
                       Eastern, American,         British, Hispanic or             Asian, Pacific               Filipin*
                       Filipin*                   Latinx, Jewish, Filipin*         Islander, Alaska
                                                                                   Native, Native
                                                                                   American,
                                                                                   White/Caucasian
      Influences       Not based on               May be identified by             Both biological and          Determined by
                       appearance;                physical appearance,             a social construct           location of birth or
                       Socially acquired;         beliefs, or practices.                                        place of
                       dynamic; can               Has Biological origins;                                       citizenship.
                       change /self-              also a social construct /                                     Geography,
                       identified                 Self-Identified                                               Legality

    *may use “Filipino”, “Filipina”, “Filipin@”, or “Filipinx”- depending on cultural preference, gender identity, (non)binary
    terminology




    33
      Katherine Van Wormer and Fred H. Besthorn, Human Behavior and the Social Environment: Groups,
    Communities, and Organizations, 3rd edition (New York: Oxford University Press, 2017), 135-136
                                                                                                                                   38
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    LANGUAGE SPECIFIC TO CULTURE: Service providers must be cautious to use language that is culturally
    aware and culturally sensitive. When service providers are mindful about the specific words used with
    victims and survivors, and make the effort to be language-informed and sensitive, not only does it assist
    in building rapport with survivors, it can increase a survivor’s sense of personal value and esteem.
    Intentional training and research may be needed to ensure language is current and the most accepted.


                      “The words we use to talk about lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people and
                       issues can have a powerful impact on our conversations. The right words can help
                     open people’s hearts and minds, while other words can create distance or confusion.”

                                                   -Allys Guide to Terminology




       Cultural Awareness and Social Diversity
       (a) Social workers should understand culture and its function in human behavior and society, recognizing the
       strengths that exist in all cultures.
       (b) Social workers should have a knowledge base of their clients' cultures and be able to demonstrate competence in
       the provision of services that are sensitive to clients' cultures and to differences among people and cultural groups.
       (c) Social workers should obtain education about and seek to understand the nature of social diversity and
       oppression with respect to race, ethnicity, national origin, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or
       expression, age, marital status, political belief, religion, immigration status, and mental or physical ability.
       (d) Social workers who provide electronic social work services should be aware of cultural and socioeconomic
       differences among clients and how they may use electronic technology. Social workers should assess cultural,
       environmental, economic, mental or physical ability, linguistic, and other issues that may affect the delivery or use
       of these services.
                       - NASW Code of Ethics, National Association of Social Workers, Ethical Standard 1.05




                                   Cultural Competency and Language Access Resources:
                 •      Futures without Violence Cultural Handbook
                 •      VAWNet Resources (a National Resource Center on Domestic Violence Project):
                             o Native American and Alaskan Village Communities
                             o Serving Trans and Non-Binary Survivors
                             o Immigrant Women and Domestic Violence
                 •      Ally’s Guide to Terminology
                 •      Breaking Barrier’s (Polaris)


                                                                                                                          39
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    10.COLLABORATION:
    A team approach is best for empowering victims of human trafficking given the broad scope of needs and the
    important roles played by various agencies. While each provider has a valuable role to fill, no one agency can provide
    for all of the needs of the victim without collaboration. Services providers can help to empower victims by assisting
    with the coordination of services, with their informed consent and participation. A lack of coordination and
    collaboration may do harm to the victim, restricting or limiting services, safety, overall well-being, and access to justice.


      EXAMPLE: Law enforcement and service providers may collaborate on law enforcement actions.
      Multiple agencies may plan together a response process that allows for service providers to speak
      with potential victims, provide screening, and link potential victims with resources. Additionally, law
      enforcement may encounter a potential victim in seemingly unrelated investigations, and therefore
      contact service providers with whom they already have a collaborative partnership.



    Service providers collaborating on behalf of a survivor should describe potential collaborations in advance, letting the
    survivor know what information may need to be shared, and if the collaboration will be multi-disciplinary in nature, to
    ensure the survivor can make an informed choice regarding utilizing potential collaborations. The survivor should be at
    the center of the collaborative team and all decisions should be with the survivor’s choice and self-determination in
    mind. Collaborative providers should, along with the survivor, communicate regularly (if concerned parties have a
    signed consent or release of information from the survivor), to ensure appropriate delivery of services, no duplication
    of services, and no triangulation or conflicting services is occurring.


      EXAMPLE: A collaborative team including the survivor, case manager, therapist, and shelter
      advocate may meet once a month to ensure services continue to be appropriate and that
      everyone is on the same page. These meetings allow for needed changes in service deliver to
      be discussed and implemented as a team. The team may occasionally communicate by
      phone or e-mail also when a meeting is not possible.



    COLLABORATION AMONG MULTI-DISCIPLINARY TEAMS AND TASK FORCES: A multi-disciplinary team can
    provide a unique way for community members, law enforcement, social service agencies, judges and
    others to work together on cases and in the community. The multi-disciplinary team should be a
    comprehensive approach in addressing the needs of survivors. These teams will need to sign a
    confidentiality agreement if any cases are discussed. When working together, these teams can identify
    and coordinate needed services on behalf of victims and survivors. Interdisciplinary collaboration allows
    the survivor a spectrum of care from a variety of professionals.

    A task force may consist of community members, social service agencies, healthcare professionals, law
    enforcement, prosecutors and other attorneys, survivors and other interested parties. A task force is
    often a collaboration at the community level that amplifies efforts, increases capacity, raises awareness
    and assists in data collection and sharing. Task forces may identify issues and concerns affecting survivors

                                                                                                                               40
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    and develop a plan of action to meet the identified gaps and needs. Task forces often highlight how
    agencies and the community can work together as well as identify gaps in services and response.


      EXAMPLE: A domestic violence shelter providing emergency housing to a survivor is unable to provide case
      management and therapy services. Shelter staff may reach out to an agency that does provide those
      services, and the two agencies begin a collaboration on the case, with the survivor’s consent. They clearly
      define the roles and responsibilities of each agency and meet together regularly as a team to assess service
      needs and leverage services.


    RESPONSE PROTOCOLS: A response protocol for new reports and victim-specific needs is a demonstration
    of organized response and is necessary for quick and efficient access to services for victims. Collaborative
    partners are an important component in the response and service delivery, as well as in the creation of
    the protocols themselves. Protocols should include contacts and services for the different points of
    intersection with the trafficking, specific circumstances of the victim, and various victim groups or
    demographics.

    Response protocol development should thoughtfully and meaningfully engage those who are best
    positioned to actively respond and assist victims, while being cautious to protect reporting details and
    personally identifying information of potential victims by not over-sharing information with groups and
    individuals who are not well-positioned to engage in response.




                                                Collaboration Resources:

           ▪    Balancing Collaboration, Confidentiality, and Privilege in Human Trafficking Cases: a webinar,
                coordinated by OVC TTAC, which explores strategies for promoting collaboration while protecting
                confidentiality
           ▪    South Carolina Human Trafficking Task Force 2017 Annual Report




                                                                                                                     41
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    11.ETHICS AND
                                                                                          Common Ethical
    PROFESSIONALISM:                                                                      Concerns in
    Those providing services to victims of human trafficking should have the
    necessary depth of knowledge, skills, experience and understanding of their role
    to work with this vulnerable population. Service providers should have both the
                                                                                          Professional Service
    knowledge and skill set to provide direct services as well as the specific            Work with Victims
    knowledge of the needs of human trafficking survivors. Service providers are in a
    primary role working directly with the survivor and in collaboration with other       and Survivors
    service providers and law enforcement. Having background, training and
    understanding of one’s role will help to ensure the best response to the victim.

    KNOW YOUR ROLE: Service providers must have a clear understanding of their            Are you well-positioned to be a
    role and be able to articulate what their role encompasses both to the survivor       service provider for trafficking
    and to other professionals. As a service provider, you are also an advocate for the   victims and survivors? If your role is
    victim or survivor you are serving. Therefore, the work you are doing on their        training and awareness only, then
    behalf and alongside them, must keep them in the center and have their safety         build partnerships with service
    and choice at the forefront. Additionally, service providers should make their role   providers. Appropriate professional
    clear to other professionals and the community. It is not uncommon for other          training and experience is needed to
    professionals to encourage and even try to compel a service provider or               engage in direct service work with
    advocate to engage in activities outside of their role, or to engage in ethically     victims and survivors of trafficking.
    questionable practices that may do harm to victims.
                                                                                          Working within the boundaries of
                                                                                          your expertise: Be clear on what
       EXAMPLE: Law enforcement is working with the service provider to                   your role is, and what it is not.
       plan an upcoming law enforcement action. Law enforcement                           Collaborative with other service
       invites community volunteers and advocates to be present in the                    providers, advocacy organizations,
       hotel room where the potential victims will be screened, as a                      mental health experts, medical
       training opportunity for them. The service provider should clearly                 professionals, legal experts, etc. as
                                                                                          needed to provide the support a
       inform law enforcement that a hotel room during an active law
                                                                                          victim needs.
       enforcement action is not the proper place to provide training on
       screening to volunteers and community advocates. It would be a                     Survivor advocates in direct service
       violation of confidentiality and generally poor practice, to allow
                                                                                          provision: Survivors have a special
                                                                                          expertise given their experiences.
       others in a room where potential victims are being screened. The
                                                                                          For all professionals engaged in
       service provider should clarify this, and firmly advocate in the best              direct service work there is
       interest of the potential victims. It may be helpful to have an MOU                tremendous value in being a healthy
       or Protocol with law enforcement in advance, outlining the                         place regarding personal traumas.
       responsibilities of each organizations, including ethical guidelines               Mentors may be helpful in providing
       such as privacy and confidentiality for victims and survivors.                     guidance you as a survivor
                                                                                          advocate. Training and education
                                                                                          related to direct service work helps
                                                                                          to provide the tools needed to work
                                                                                          with other survivors, all of42whom
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking                  will have different experiences.
    IMAGE USE: Common images used to portray human trafficking include chains, physical violence,
    abuse, bar codes, suitcases or jars with a human inside, and other images related to violence,
    confinement, or injuries. The media will often use images and language to sensationali ze the issue
    and gain more widespread interest in their story. Service providers should seek to not sensationalize
    human trafficking, and instead utilize imagery that doesn’t reinforce false narratives or stereotypes.

    LANGUAGE: The language used by service providers is incredibly important, as it directly impacts
    both the survivors engaged in services, as well as other community partners an d the larger
    community. Using intentional language, that is thoughtful of the impact the exact words or implied
    meaning of the words, may have on others is important to consider. While law enforcement and
    prosecutors may be restricted to certain legal language, service providers have both the freedom
    and responsibility to utilize language that considers the impact on those they serve, as well as the
    larger community.
        • Using the word “rescue” in regards to separating a victim from their trafficking situation places
            the service provider in the power-heavy role of “rescuer”, while implying that the victim has less
            power
        • Words related to “innocence” or the “loss of innocence” may be perceived as victim-blaming, or
            that there should be shame on behalf of the victim for the abuse they have endured, such that
            their “innocence” is a question
        • Possessive language such as “my victim” or “our girls” creates a dynamic of a power position, or
            perceived control, on the part of the individuals using the language, who are likely in a helper
            role. This could replicate the behavior and language of traffickers, showing their possession and
            control over victims.
        • Foreign national victims and survivors who do not have a legal immigration status should not be
            referred to as “illegals”, “aliens”, “illegal immigrants”. Appropriate, victim-considerate language
            would be to refer to them with person-first language, such as “a __________ (Chinese) national
            who is undocumented” or “a foreign national who is undocumented”. It can also be appropriate
            to refer to their status as “undocumented”.




                                                  Example: “Victim” and “Survivor”

      “The term “victim” has legal implications within the criminal justice process and generally means an individual who
      has suffered harm as a result of criminal conduct. “Victims” also have particular rights within the criminal justice
      process. Federal law enforcement agencies often use the term “victim” as part of their official duties. “Survivor” is a
      term used by many in the services field to recognize the strength it takes to continue on a journey toward healing in
      the aftermath of a traumatic experience…both terms are intended to honor those who have suffered, or are
      suffering, the effects of being trafficked.”

                -Federal Strategic Action Plan on Services for Victims of Human Trafficking in the United States, 2013-2017




                                                                                                                              43
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    ACCURATE STATISTICS AND CITED SOURCES: Accuracy in data related to human trafficking has been a
    challenge in the field for many years. However, there are now many reputable organizations and
    ethically-conducted studies that provide a myriad of data and statistics on human trafficking
    prevalence, cases, trends, etc. As a service provider, it’s important that your materials and
    presentations include accurate statistics and information from reputable sources. Please cite those
    sources, and refrain from repeating statistics that have an unknown origin or may sensationalize the
    issue.

    It’s also important to know and cite the limitations of data, for example explaining qualifiers about
    exactly what is or is not included in the data, the dates when the data was collected, etc. Caution
    should be utilized around the conflation of statistics. For example, including sex workers who were
    not identified as trafficking victims as part of the total number of victims, or including victims of
    labor exploitation who were not identified as labor trafficking victims in the total number of victims
    reported. Both examples inflate the number of victims reported, when in actuality they shouldn’t be
    included as part of that specific data set.



                      RELIABLE SOURCES FOR HUMAN TRAFFICKING DATA AND STATISTICS

                  ▪    Polaris Project



                  ▪    Office for Trafficking in Persons



                  ▪    U.S. Department of State: Annual Trafficking in Person Report



                  ▪    U.S. Department of Justice: Attorney General’s Annual Report on Human Trafficking



                  ▪    International Labor Organization



                  ▪    United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime




                  ▪    2017 Federal Human Trafficking Report

    ACCURACY IN SERVICE DESCRIPTION: There are many different types of human trafficking services
    programs. Some specialize in a specific service area (housing, mental health, legal services), while others
    specialize in serving certain populations (foreign nationals, adult females, LGBTQ youth). When describing
    or discussing services, be transparent and accurate in the types of services provided, any associated costs

                                                                                                            44
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    for services, the demographic population served, possible wait times, if the program has an expertise in
    human trafficking or primarily serves a different population, possible length of services, etc.


     EXAMPLE: The transitional shelter is free for the first two months, but after that
     each resident must pay $200 monthly for rent. Community partners and potential
     residents should know that there is an expectation to pay for the services, how
     much the cost will be, and if there are exceptions to paying those costs.

    COMMUNICATION WITH MEDIA : Talking with reporters or journalists can be one of the most daunting
    tasks related to raising awareness about human trafficking. When approached by a member of the press
    for an interview keep in mind that your primary role is as a service provider and advocate.
    Communicating with the press through this lens will be helpful in determining how to respond to
    questions and what your general commentary ought to be. Providers should ensure they are following
    their agency’s policies and procedures in regards to communicating with the media and exercise caution
    in regards to cases that have open criminal or civil cases.




                              BEST PRACTICE TIPS FOR COMMUNICATING WITH MEDIA:

     1) Before speaking with a media representative who is requesting an interview, it may help to do a bit
        of research into their reporting to determine if you feel comfortable with THEM being the person
        with whom you interview, by seeing the quality of their work, and how they cover difficult topics. You
        can always say no to the interview. Sending some statistics and information via e-mail could be done
        in lieu of an interview if you are not comfortable with providing an interview to them.
     2) Have 2-3 main points ready before talking with the media. No matter what question you are asked,
        speak only to those points.
     3) Do not comment on specific cases. Instead speak to more general issues related to your 2-3 points.
     4) When requested by media to provide them contact with a survivor, only connect media with survivor
          advocates who are public already and do not makes requests to survivors who are currently
          accessing your services. Connect first with the survivor to request permission.
     5)   Provide the National Hotline Number, or your local hotline number, as a resource.
     6)   Remember that even though you aren’t holding the microphone you do have complete control over
          what YOU will say. If you need a minute to think before responding, it is best to pause or ask them to
          repeat the question while you consider the most appropriate response.
     7)   A great follow-up for media, is to send a fact sheet or other information via e-mail. Sending a written
          document for reference relieves you of the burden of remembering exact statistics and sources. Plus,
          the media contact will learn even more if they read what you sent them.
     8)   Request a copy of the article or news report. If something is erroneous, request a correction.




                                                                                                               45
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    ONLINE PRESENCE AND SOCIAL MEDIA: Many service providers                       Recommendations for Safe and
    have some degree of presence on websites and/or social media,
                                                                                   Ethical Social Media Use for
    whether professionally or personally. This can be a challenging
    space to navigate as a provider, given the emergence of trends                 Service Providers
    and sensationalized nature of topics, immediacy of certain                     1.   To minimize the potential for social media
    requests or issues that arise, and one’s emotional connectedness                    [risks], it would be prudent for practitioners
    to the topic of human trafficking in particular.                                    to first take an in depth look at the content
                                                                                        of their online identity and then consider
    Confidentiality and privacy of victims and survivors should be a                    taking appropriate security precautions
    primary consideration and concern. If any personally identifiable                   with their own personal information and
                                                                                        identity. General caution is advised when
    information, including demographic information or photos, is
                                                                                        posting anything.
    made public on social media, there could be immediate and                      2.   Practitioners should become familiar with
    irreversible risk to the victim, as it is impossible to control who                 the privacy settings on their personally
    might access that information and what they might do as a result                    controlled social medial sites and adjust
                                                                                        them so as to limit undesired access by
    to harm the victim.
                                                                                        clients to personal information.
    Additionally, when stories or articles are posted by community                      Practitioners might also want to disguise
                                                                                        themselves online through the use of
    partners, the press, or family and friends, a service provider
                                                                                        pseudonyms
    should not comment on those postings in a way that would                       3.   Practitioners are advised to conduct a
    indicate any personal involvement in that specific case, or with                    personal Google search in order to gain
    those victims. Giving some indication of personal involvement                       awareness of what anyone including a
                                                                                        client might find out about them. If
    could put both the victim and the provide at risk of harm, in
                                                                                        inaccurate or clinically inappropriate
    addition to violating the privacy and confidentiality of the victim.                information is found on a website, the
                                                                                        practitioner should submit a request to the
                                                                                        site’s manager to have the information
 Competence                                                                             removed, if possible.
 (a) Social workers should provide services and represent themselves as            4.   One way to help control the information a
 competent only within the boundaries of their education, training, license,            client might find is to create a professional
 certification, consultation received, supervised experience, or other relevant         website with relevant links, and to possibly
 professional experience.                                                               purchase a domain name, both of which
 (b) Social workers should provide services in substantive areas or use                 would help to reduce misrepresentation
 intervention techniques or approaches that are new to them only after engaging         online, while also providing an avenue
 in appropriate study, training, consultation, and supervision from people who          through which to bring in potential clients.
 are competent in those interventions or techniques.                                    There are now websites such as
 (c) When generally recognized standards do not exist with respect to an                www.wix.com or www.weebly.com that
 emerging area of practice, social workers should exercise careful judgment and         enable those with little to no web
 take responsible steps to ensure the competence of their work and to protect           development experience to easily develop
 clients from harm.                                                                     a site.
 (d) Social workers who use technology in the provision of social work services    5.   Practitioners should discuss online privacy
 should ensure that they have the necessary knowledge and skills to provide such        issues openly with their clients and suggest
 services in a competent manner. This includes an understanding of the special          more appropriate means of communication
 communication challenges when using technology and the ability to implement            (e.g. telephone) indicating that it benefits
 strategies to address these challenges.                                                both clinician and client to respect
 (e) Social workers who use technology in providing social work services should         professional boundaries. Focusing on
 comply with the laws governing technology and social work practice in the              establishing a professional boundary from
 jurisdiction in which they are regulated and located and, as applicable, in the        the start and outlining the means of
 jurisdiction in which the client is located.                                           acceptable communication in the beginning
         -    NASW Code of Ethics, National Association of Social Workers               of the relationship will serve both the client
                                                                                        and the practitioner in the long run and
                                                                                        more likely than not, positively impact
                                                                                                                          46
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking                outcomes for clients.

                                                                                   -    Harbeck Voshel and Wesala, Social Media and Social
                                                                                        Work Ethics: Determining Best Practices in an
                                                                                        Ambiguous Reality, Journal of Social Work Values &
                                                                                        Ethics, Spring 2015, Vol. 12, No. 1
    12.SURVIVOR INFORMED:
    Service providers should ensure that human trafficking programming is survivor-informed. It is survivors who have
    experienced trafficking, and have first-hand knowledge of trafficker’s methods, the vulnerabilities and specific
    exploitations of victims, how they could be reached with information during their trafficking experience, and they bring
    the voice of survivors to trainings and other awareness efforts. Survivors have a specific expertise, valuable knowledge
    and insight, which providers should utilize and incorporate into programming.

    SURVIVOR ENGAGEMENT: There are a variety of ways that survivors may inform services. Providers should determine
    which methods for survivor engagement would best work within the structures and purposes of their programming,
    while ensuring that programming is survivor-informed in a variety of ways. Survivor-engagement should not be limited
    to only one method, or one survivor on staff, as if there is a “token”-like nature to engagement. Survivor engagement
    should be purposeful, meaningful, and non-exploitative. 34



                                                                                                      Task-Specific
         Employment of                               Contracting with
                                                                                                        Survivor
           Survivors                                    Survivors
                                                                                                      Engagement
         Developing and Implementing                        Program Evaluation                      Attendance at Task Force and
                  Outreach                                                                               Coalition Meetings
                                                       Participation in Focus Groups
         Creating and Providing Training                                                             Participation in Task-Specific
                                                            Informing Research                      Projects (ie. contributing to an
                                                                                                    annual report or news article)
                   Mentoring                                      Training

                                                          Public Speaking / Panels                 Providing Feedback on Services
                 Direct Services
                                                                 Mentoring
                                                                                                   Completing Surveys or Engaging
             Program Management                            Material Development                             in Reseach



    *These categorical breakdowns are not exclusive, as survivors should be considered for any position for which they qualify

    Providers should have a policy related to survivor engagement, establishing guidelines internally for their
    work with survivors in informing programming. Policies should address issues such as: at what point
    former clients may be engaged and in what ways, boundaries related to survivors telling their story,
    guidance ensuring survivors choose how they will be identified in public, and compensation, among other
    things. Above all, survivor engagement must be ethical and approached in a manner that keeps in mind
    the well-being of the survivor and the purposes of the service program.



    34
     Lipenga, F. & Chumbow, E. (2018, April) “Ethical Partnership with Survivors”, workshop presented at Freedom
    Network Conference 2018- Standing Tall: A Vision of Freedom in Times of Change, Denver, CO.
                                                                                                                                       47
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    EXAMPLE: The Kentucky Office of the Attorney General created a Survivors Council of survivors of crime, including
    trafficking survivors, to advise and assist the Office of the Attorney General on matters related to victims of crime.
    This includes, but is not limited to, awareness initiatives, training efforts, publications, policy, and legislative
    initiatives. Its purpose is to ensure that these efforts are victim-centered and response to the needs of diverse
    victims. The Council has participated in training and awareness events and issues an annual report with
    recommendations for the state on how to become more victim-centered.




           “Meaningful survivor input helps case managers, service providers, and others conducting
             outreach, public awareness, coalition building, or other related activities to human
                      trafficking understand how trauma affects the recovery of those
                  impacted by human trafficking and how to effectively [meet their needs].
                    These efforts are intended to prevent instances of revictimization…”

             – Survivor-Informed Practice Recommendations, 2017 Human Trafficking Leadership Academy



    CONSIDERATIONS FOR EMPLOYMENT OF SURVIVORS: Trafficking survivors often need and want jobs, in a variety of
    fields, including in the area of trafficking-specific programs. As such, programs should seek to employ survivors such
    that the best interests of both the program and the survivor are at the forefront, ensuring a good fit between the
    experience, knowledge, and skill sets of the survivor and the organization. Keep in mind that positions filled by
    survivors don’t necessarily need to have “survivor” in the title of the position. Survivors should be considered for any
    position in a program, including management positions, based on their meeting the qualifications for a specific
    position. Encouraging survivors to apply could be accomplished by simply adding on the job notice “trafficking survivors
    encouraged to apply”. Programs may need to also explore with Human Resources developing a process to provide
    trauma response and support if an employed survivor is triggered at work or needs on-going therapy, with assistance
    from the employer. Background check considerations may also need to be addressed.


    The trafficking experience of the survivor alone is not sufficient for a survivor to be employed with a
    trafficking service organization. Each survivor must also have sufficient educational background, healing
    and support specific to their trauma, and other necessary skills to work within the dimensions of a specific
    position as an employee. This is in the best interest of the survivor, the organization, and those being
    served.



    COMPENSATION FOR SURVIVORS: When survivors are asked to inform services or practice based on their
    experience as a trafficking survivor, whether as an employee or contractor, survivors should be
    compensated for their time and work. Policies developed related to survivor engagement and
    compensation should address details such as: what qualifies as client feedback versus conducting and
    evaluation of program outcomes; protocols for working with community partners requesting access to
    program participants for a research study; and policies specific to confidentiality and anonymity in
    research participation. Terms of compensation should be determined in advance, addressed initially by
                                                                                                                           48
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    the service organization (the survivor should not have to bring up the issue of compensation), and
    agreements on the terms of compensation should be made in writing whenever possible, through
    contracts or invoices. Any gifts provided to survivors to show appreciation for their assistance should be
    provided in addition to other compensation, not in place of compensation. Funding should be sought for
    compensating survivors by providers in advance of engaging with survivors.

    COLLABORATION WITH SURVIVOR-LED PROGRAMS: Providers should seek out opportunities to support
    and collaborate with programs that are survivor-led. This includes inviting and encouraging survivor-led
    programs to attend task force and coalition meetings. Unity is important to foster, but also difficult to
    achieve among service providers. As such, it’s important to determine to what extent programs can work
    together when unity is challenging. Survivors who are in positions of leadership or influence in
    organizations should recognize the tremendous opportunity and responsibility they have to lead the way
    in regards to ethical engagement with survivors, including other survivor-led organizations. It’s important
    to keep in mind, however, that survivor-led organizations are not the only legitimate service provider
    organizations. Smart practice is that programs are survivor-informed, which may include, but is not
    exclusively, survivor-led programs.

    As with any community collaboration, there may be differences in core values, philosophies, and program
    strategies. It’s important to identify the extent to which each agency can partner with and support the
    other’s program and client population. MOU’s may be a helpful tool for clarifying each organization’s role.

       EXAMPLE: The Bakhita Empowerment Initiative at Catholic Charities of Louisville coordinates My Life
       My Choice groups throughout Kentucky, utilizing their survivor-informed curriculum and survivor-led
       training developed by the Justice Resource Institute of Boston. All group participants are gifted a
       “Survivor Guide to Leaving”, created by survivors through GEMS (Girls Education and Mentoring
       Services) in New York City.




                                               Survivor Leadership Programs:

            Survivor Alliance          │         Rebecca Bender Initiative         │    National Survivor Network

                           Center for Combating Human Trafficking at Wichita State University

              Survivor Leadership Network of San Diego             │        GEMS Survivor Leadership Institute




    ETHICAL PRACTICE STANDARDS FOR ALL PROGRAMS: Service providers are expected to engage in ethical
    practices across the board and do no harm in regards to the services and support they provide to
    program participants. If a service provider recognizes that a survivor-led organization is not engaged in
    ethical practices, efforts should be made to provide support and resources, if possible and appropriate, to
    assist with aligning those services to best practice standards that do no harm. If this is not possible, and if
    efforts have been made but to no avail, providers should not feel compelled to collaborate with or

                                                                                                                 49
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    support a survivor-led program that is doing harm and is not engaged in ethical practice. On the contrary,
    the service provider is obligated to speak up and ensure they are not supporting unethical, harmful
    practice, even if it’s survivor-led, as they would with a program that is not survivor-led. Survivor-led
    programs engaged in unethical practices harm not only their program participants, but cause additional
    harm to the larger community and the movement of survivor-engagement in human trafficking
    programming.


    “A survivor-informed practice includes meaningful input from a diverse community of survivors at all
          stages of a program or project, including development, implementation and evaluation.”

            -Survivor-Informed Practice Recommendations, 2017 Human Trafficking Leadership Academy

    TRAINING AND SUPPORT FOR SURVIVORS: Service providers who are engaging with survivors should
    ensure survivors have the training, support, and information they need to be as prepared and informed
    as possible, in advance and throughout their engagement with the program. This may involve attending
    conferences together to increase knowledge, setting up classes related to media and public speaking, or
    going through survivor-specific training (National Survivor Network, Rebecca Bender’s Elevate Academy).
    As with other paid staff or volunteers, survivors identified as such in professional settings, should receive
    supervision and support from program staff when they are engaging in informing services.

      EXAMPLE: If a service provider, advocacy organization, or coalition requests a survivor to speak at an event,
      they should make arrangements in advance for the survivor to determine if they will accept the invitation to
      speak, the boundaries related to the content of their public comments (ideally not recounting their trafficking
      experience), arrange for monetary compensation for the survivor engagement, and be physically present at the
      event to provide support to the survivor as they are making their public remarks. If the survivor appears to be
      triggered or have a trauma-response while their public comments are being made, they should be supported
      and provided assistance in ending their comments early, in a trauma-informed way, and assisted with stepping
      out of the public eye. If it’s anticipated that making the public comments may be difficult for the survivor, the
      survivor’s therapist may be arranged in advance to be at the event, with the survivor’s consent, to provide
      additional support.

    HONORING BOUNDARIES: Not all survivors want to, or should be, engaged in human trafficking
    programming as contractors, staff, or survivor-leaders. Some survivors want to just move on, and
    not engage in informing programs. Their boundaries should be honored. Some survivors may want
    to inform programming only in ways that allow them to stay “under the radar”, such as
    anonymously informing research or program evaluation. Their boundaries should be honored.
    Survivor advocates and leaders may not want to tell their trafficking story, but instead focus on
    their freedom, their work, and other aspects of their lives. Their boundaries should be honored.
    Additionally, providers should come alongside them recognizing the support, training, and resources
    needed to be a public advocate and leader, and offer to assist with that support, as appropriate and
    needed. If a survivor advocate or leader does not have the training and support they need to
    engage in that way, and does not wish to pursue the training and support they would need, the
    boundaries that places on their engagement as a survivor leader or advocate should also be
    honored.

                                                                                                                          50
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
                         Survivor-Informed Best Practice Recommendations


   1. Grantees should continuously and appropriately access survivor expertise at all appropriate
   stages throughout program development, implementation, and evaluation.
   2. Grantees should incorporate diverse human trafficking survivor perspectives (sex and labor
   trafficking survivors, adult and minor survivors, LGBTQ survivors, and foreign-national and
   domestic survivors) and integrate best practices among other parallel movements, including
   domestic violence, sexual assault, and labor exploitation, when appropriate.
   3. A strengths-based approach should be used to determine appropriate places and levels of
   engagement for survivors within an organization or project. Such an approach should consider
   survivors’ expertise and strengths; length of time out of their trafficking situation; training on
   trauma-informed, victim-centered, and survivor-informed practices; and effective management of
   the survivor’s triggers. This approach should also consider organizational or project need, along
   with the organization’s capacity to appropriately support the survivor.


           -   Survivor-Informed Practice Recommendations, 2017 Human Trafficking Leadership Academy




                                                                                                    51
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
       13.EVIDENCE-BASED INTERVENTIONS:
       While human trafficking programming is no longer in its first years of existence, there remains a lack of
       evaluated, validated programming, particularly in comparison to fields such as child abuse, sexual assault,
       and domestic violence. There has been work done on policy, service structures, best practice standards,
       data collection, research, and evaluation in previous years, however it is not sufficient to address the diverse
       programmatic, data-related, or policy-specific needs around human trafficking issues. Programs continue to
       learn how to improve on previous structures, and new programs continue to develop to fill gaps and
       specialize in the field, moving the needle forward even more to ensure the greatest positive outcomes and
       impact for communities and individuals. Programs should intentionally utilize existing resources and
       interventions that evidence has shown to be effective. Similarly, programs should move away from
       interventions and techniques that evidence has shown to not be effective. Providers should seek to engage
       in ongoing data collection and evaluation to analyze the effectiveness of their programs and services.


                 A program, practice, or intervention is evidence-based when its effectiveness has been
               determined by causal evidence, generally obtained through one or more impact evaluation.

                                                      -Office for Victims of Crime


       EXISTING EVIDENCE-BASED INTERVENTIONS AND GAPS: There are a number of existing evidence-based
       intervention strategies and tools, which service providers may choose to utilize. These include program
       development and intervention strategies, prevention education curriculums, and screening tools. There
       continue to be gaps in regards to prevention education curriculums for males and intervention strategies
       for demand reduction. The existing gaps provide opportunities for programs and researchers to conduct
       evaluations and study the effectiveness of new curriculums or strategies, while at the same time
       presenting a challenge for programs who would like to adopt evidence-based strategies now.



   EVIDENCE-BASED PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT:                           EVIDENCE-BASED PREVENTION EDUCATION:
   ▪     OJP Executive Reference Guide: Human Trafficking        ▪    Not a #Number Curriculum (Love 146)
   ▪     National Institute of Justice: Crime Solutions

   EVIDENCE-BASED PROGRAMS AND PRACTICES:                        EVIDENCE-BASED SCREENING TOOL:
   ▪     NREPP: SAMHSA’s National Registry of Evidence-          ▪    Out of the Shadows (VERA Screening Tool)
         Based Programs and Practices
   ▪     Promising Practices- An Overview of Trauma-
         informed Therapeutic Support for Survivors of
         Human Trafficking
   ▪     Evidence-Based Practices for Effective Community
         Coalitions



                                                                                                                    52
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    14.SUPPORT AND SELF CARE FOR PROFESSIONAL STAFF:
    Self-care for service providers is one of the most valuable methods of ensuring staff are healthy
    themselves and enables staff to continue providing the challenging and intensive services that victims and
    survivors need and deserve. Support for direct service staff should be an agency priority and must be
    modeled by supervisors and supported by organizational leadership. Supervisors are key to modeling and
    providing opportunities for program staff to engage in self care regularly. A flexible work environment,
    with regularly support from supervisors may play a key role in the ability for staff to manage their stress
    and maintain an overall state of health and well-being.


    ESTABLISHING AND MAINTAINING BOUNDARIES: Setting and maintaining boundaries is one of the most helpful tools
    for a service provider to utilize in order to promote a healthy work environment for themselves, their coworkers, and
    the survivors they serve. Service providers should establish healthy boundaries with one another and maintain
    relationships with family and friends outside of the workplace as well. Providers should also be intentional and firm in
    establishing and maintaining relationships with clients and former clients. Social media can make this particularly
    challenging. A victim may not understand professional boundaries, and may also find it challenging to establish healthy
    relationship boundaries personally. Therefore, boundary setting must often be initially modeled and structured by the
    service provider.



      EXAMPLE: It is best practice to not connect with victims and survivors you
      are currently serving through social media. Being connected through social
      media can easily blur the relationship and boundaries initially established,
      and can quickly encourage a dual-relationship, as opposed to a clearly
      delineated relationship of provider-client. Once those boundaries have
      been blurred, it can be incredibly difficult to establish healthy boundaries
      again afterwards.



      Conflicts of Interest
      (c) Social workers should not engage in dual or multiple relationships with clients or former clients in which
      there is a risk of exploitation or potential harm to the client. In instances when dual or multiple relationships are
      unavoidable, social workers should take steps to protect clients and are responsible for setting clear,
      appropriate, and culturally sensitive boundaries. (Dual or multiple relationships occur when social workers
      relate to clients in more than one relationship, whether professional, social, or business. Dual or multiple
      relationships can occur simultaneously or consecutively.)
                       - NASW Code of Ethics, National Association of Social Workers, Standard 1.06




                                                                                                                         53
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    UTILIZE AGENCY POLICIES AND PROCEDURES TO ASSIST IN SELF-CARE: Read through your organization’s
    policies and procedures and determine if there are policies that may be utilized to assist service providers
    with balancing their emotionally and physically taxing jobs to promote self-care among staff.

        •       Could sick days be utilized for mental health/ wellness days?
        •       Is there flexibility in staff hours and work locations that would allow for working from home,
                taking comp time after working long hours, or changing daily work hours to better accommodate
                home responsibilities?
        •       Is there a wellness program available through agency health insurance that could assist with staff
                accessing counseling?
        •       Could the staff take a retreat together to promote healthy work relationships and rest, while also
                providing some training and support for self-care?



    INCORPORATE AND PRIORITIZE SELF CARE AS A TRAINING TOPIC: Encourage direct service staff to
    participate in trainings and workshops that discuss aspects of self-care. Let staff know that self-care is a
    priority, and that it is encouraged for them to attend workshops at conferences related to self-care.
    Model self-care by allowing time in staff and program meetings to provide for the physical and emotional
    needs of staff. This could be done by simply having a staff meeting at a local coffee shop instead of the
    office, by serving lunch during the staff meeting, or by including a short self-care exercise in the agenda
    for the meeting.



    INITIATE AND ENCOURAGE CONVERSATIONS RELATED TO SELF-AWARENESS: There are many ways to
    increase self-awareness. Reading books on the topic, taking online quizzes, or having conversations with
    trusted friends, family, or colleagues. Consider utilizing a tool, such as the Enneagram, and spending time
    discussing it with your colleagues (it can also be a helpful tool for clients). As we become more awareness
    of why we are the way we are, and why we react the way we do to certain events and circumstances, we
    are better able to regulate our reactions, be healthier versions of ourselves, and interact more positively
    with others.



            EXAMPLE: Self Awareness Activity
                                                             “Self-awareness is the accurate appraisal and
            List the first 3 answers that come to
                                                             understanding of your abilities and preferences and their
            mind for each of these questions:
                                                             implications for your behavior and their impact on
            -    What motivates me?                          others.”
            -    What makes me angry?
            -    What causes stress for me?                  - Adrien Furnham, PhD., Psychology Today
            -    What makes me afraid?
            -    When do I feel the most content or
                 happy?




                                                                                                                54
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    15.TRAINING FOR PROVIDERS:
    Service providers require training and expertise, similar in nature to the very specific expertise required
    by law enforcement and other criminal justice professionals. This expertise allows providers to coordinate
    a variety of services efficiently to best serve victims. Service providers have an opportunity and
    responsibility to bring this expertise to the field, to inform this collaborative, multidisciplinary work.
    Responding to needs for services and providing case management and advocacy to support victims and
    survivors is hard work, and it is resource intensive. Training and expertise regarding best practice service
    provision with victims and survivors are key factors in a provider’s ability to effectively respond to cases of
    human trafficking.

    STAFF BACKGROUND: Individuals who are working as staff in human trafficking programs must have the
    necessary background and experience to do the specific work for which they are being hired. As such, the
    program must first be clear on which staff roles will engage directly with victims, and in what ways, versus
    staff roles that are strictly public awareness and training.

    STAFF TRAINING COMPONENTS:

        ➢    Human trafficking facts & information
        ➢    Victim groups and demographics
        ➢    Trauma-informed interviewing & screening
        ➢    Trauma-informed practice
        ➢    Best practice case management
        ➢    Utilizing interpreters
        ➢    Self-care; handling organizational grief & toxic stress
        ➢    Boundaries
        ➢    Time management
        ➢    Tools for self-awareness
        ➢    Victim-centered approach
        ➢     Identification and response
        ➢    Confidentiality and privacy
        ➢    Safety planning
        ➢    Community collaboration and networking
        ➢    Internal services in one’s own program
        ➢    Elective Trainings (role or population specific)




                                                                                                                55
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    FINAL CONSIDERATIONS:
    ORGANIZATIONAL CAPACITY: Services providers should ensure they have the organizational capacity
    needed to provide services to victims of human trafficking. Capacity issues relate to organizational
    structure, as well as agency policies and practices, and staff education and expertise. Structural capacity
    issues to consider include: agency governance and non-profit status (501c-3).



    ADHERENCE TO GUIDING PRINCIPLES AS FUNDING CONSIDERATION: In some cases, state legislation or
    funding certification policies outline requirements related to adherence to guiding principles specific to
    the provision of services, in order for an agency to be considered a qualified service provider for human
    trafficking-specific services.



    ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF OTHER RESOURCES: There are many service providers engaged in best practices
    services to trafficking victims and survivors. As such, there are many additional resources available in
    addition to those mentioned in this Guide. We have attempted to highlight and provide access to some of
    those resources, with the understanding that there are others available, and that additional resources will
    continue to be developed.



    GUIDING PRINCIPLES MAY CHANGE OVER TIME: While the core principles may remain consistent over
    time, some values and specific guidance may evolve as we continue to learn about the dynamics of
    human trafficking-specific victimization, as programming becomes more survivor-informed, and with the
    emergence of additional research and evidence-based practice.




                                        Best Practice Guidance Resources:

             Florida Statewide Promising Best Practice Guidelines to Support a Continuum of Services for
             Victims of Commercial Sexual Exploitation (CSE) and Sex Trafficking

             Georgia’s Child Sexual Abuse & Exploitation Prevention Technical Assistance Resource Guide

             Ohio Human Trafficking Commission Standards for Service to Trafficked Persons

             Safe Horizon: 14 Principles to Support Human Trafficking Victims




                                                                                                              56
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
         APPENDIX A:
         Guiding Principle References
GUIDE SECTION/TOPIC                    SOURCE ORGANIZATION /                    REFERENCE / ONLINE RESOURCE LINK
                                       AUTHOR
A-A.
RESOURCE CONSIDERATIONS
                                       Office for Trafficking in Persons        https://www.acf.hhs.gov/otip
                                       (OTIP)
                                       Office for Victims of Crime (OVC)        https://ovc.gov/
                                       National Human Trafficking Hotline       https://humantraffickinghotline.org/
                                       (NHTH)
                                       Polaris                                  www.polarisproject.org
                                       Project REACH                            http://www.traumacenter.org/clients/reach_svcs.php
                                       Freedom Network USA                      https://freedomnetworkusa.org/
                                       Shared Hope International                https://sharedhope.org/
                                       National Association of Social Work      https://www.socialworkers.org/About/Ethics/Code-of-
                                       (NASW)                                   Ethics/Code-of-Ethics-English
A-B.
STATE LEGISLATION RESOURCES
a. Definition of human                 Office for Victims of Crime - Training   https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/1-
     trafficking & human trafficking   & Technical Assistance (OVCTTAC)         understanding-human-trafficking/14-human-trafficking-laws/
     laws
b. Development of human                Polaris                                  https://polarisproject.org/sites/default/files/2014-Look-Back.pdf
     trafficking laws
c. State laws and issue briefs         Polaris                                  https://polarisproject.org/state-laws-issue-briefs
d. State Legislation Ratings,          Shared Hope International                https://sharedhope.org/what-we-do/bring-justice/reportcards/
     Reports, and
     Accomplishments for 2017
e. Multi-State legislation             Northeastern University                  http://www.northeastern.edu/humantrafficking/federal-state-
     overview                                                                   responses-to-human-trafficking/state-legislation/
f. 2017 Florida State Human            The Florida Legislature                  http://www.leg.state.fl.us/Statutes/index.cfm?App_mode=Displa
     Trafficking Statutes                                                       y_Statute&Search_String=&URL=0400-
                                                                                0499/0409/Sections/0409.1754.html
g.     Tennessee State Human           End Slavery Tennessee                    https://www.endslaverytn.org/human-trafficking-and-slavery-
       Trafficking Legislation                                                  laws
       Overview
A-C.
KEY TERMS & DEFINITIONS
a. OVC glossary                        OVC                                      https://www.ovc.gov/model-standards/glossary.html
b. Federal definition of Disability    Americans with Disabilities Act          https://adata.org/faq/what-definition-disability-under-ada
                                       (ADA) National Network
c.     Glossary of translation and     Babel Linguistics Inc                    http://babel-linguistics.com/wp-
       interpreting - terms and                                                 content/uploads/2013/08/Glossary-Translation.pdf
       definitions
A-1.
VICTIM-CENTERED APPROACH
a. Understanding a victim-             OVCTTAC                                  https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/1-
     centered approach                                                          understanding-human-trafficking/13-victim-centered-approach
b. Mental grounding exercise           National Criminal Justice Training       https://ncjtc-static.fvtc.edu/resources/RS00006553.jpeg
     example                           Center (NCJTC)


                                                                                                                                      57
     GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
GUIDE SECTION/TOPIC                    SOURCE ORGANIZATION /                 REFERENCE / ONLINE RESOURCE LINK
                                       AUTHOR
A-2. EMPOWERMENT/STRENGTHS
BASED
                                                                             https://static1.squarespace.com/static/599abfb4e6f2e19ff048494
a.     Human Trafficking Survivor      United Kingdom Human Trafficking      f/t/599eeb6bcf81e06e2cc016e3/1503587187213/Trafficking+Surv
       Care Standards Guide            Foundation                            ivor+Care+Standards+2015.pdf
b.     Training for working with
       survivors of trafficking        OVC TTAC                              https:// www.ovcttac.gov/traffickinglc/dsp_files.cfm
c.     Strengths based questions
       and approach to practice        Dennis Saleebey                       The Strengths Perspective in Social Work Practice (2013)
A-3.
TRAUMA-INFORMED APPROACH
a. Concept of trauma and
     guidance for trauma-informed      Substance Abuse and Mental Health     https://store.samhsa.gov/shin/content/SMA14-4884/SMA14-
     approach                          Services Administration (SAMHSA)      4884.pdf
b. Core principles of trauma-                                                http://www.socialwork.career/2014/05/core-principles-of-
     informed care                     Social Work Career                    trauma-informed-care-key-learnings-1-of-3.html
c. Summary of trauma informed                                                Using trauma theory to design service systems. New directions in
     care                              Maxine Harris & Roger D. Fallot       mental health services(2001), Jossey-Bass, N89
d. Professional training in            Treating the Hidden Wounds:
     trauma and trauma informed        Trauma Treatment & Mental Health
     care/ Triggering re-              Recovery for Victims of Human
     traumatization/ Smart tips for    Trafficking by Heather J. Clawson,
     building and utilizing a trauma   Ph.D., Amy Salomon, Ph.D., and Lisa   https://aspe.hhs.gov/pdf-report/treating-hidden-wounds-
     informed lens in your task        Goldblatt Grace, LICSW, MPH           trauma-treatment-and-mental-health-recovery-victims-human-
     force                                                                   trafficking
e. Definitions relating to trauma-                                           https://www.samhsa.gov/samhsaNewsLetter/Volume_22_Numb
     informed                          SAMHSA                                er_2/trauma_tip/key_terms.html
f. Using a Trauma Informed                                                   https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/4-supporting-
     Approach                          OVC TTAC                              victims/41-using-a-trauma-informed-approach/
g. A useful guide to facilitate an
     understanding of complex
     trauma reactions and to
     integrate awareness into
     direct service of survivors of                                          http://www.traumacenter.org/clients/projectreach/H-
     human trafficking.                Project REACH                         O%20Trauma-Informed%20Case%20Study_final.pdf
h. Module on Trauma-Informed
     Care through Victim                                                     https://www.ovcttac.gov/views/TrainingMaterials/dspOnline_VA
     Assistance Training               OVC TTAC                              TOnline.cfm




                                                                                                                                    58
     GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
GUIDE SECTION/TOPIC                      SOURCE ORGANIZATION /                 REFERENCE / ONLINE RESOURCE LINK
                                         AUTHOR
A-4.
SCREENING
a. Comprehensive Human
     Trafficking Assessment (with
     questions by type of                                                      https://humantraffickinghotline.org/sites/default/files/Comprehe
     trafficking)                        Polaris                               nsive%20Trafficking%20Assessment.pdf
b. Adult Trafficking Screening                                                 https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/otip/adult_human_tr
     Tool                                OTIP                                  afficking_screening_tool_and_guide.pdf
c. Child Trafficking Screening
     Tool                                Georgia Cares                         www.gacares.org/ckfinder/userfiles/files/Screening%20Tool.pdf
d. Trafficking Victim
     Identification Tool (for sex or                                           https://humantraffickinghotline.org/sites/default/files/human-
     labor trafficking)                  VERA Institute of Justice             trafficking-identification-tool-and-user-guidelines.pdf
                                                                               https://storage.googleapis.com/vera-web-
                                                                               assets/downloads/Publications/out-of-the-shadows-
e.     Spanish Language Trafficking                                            identification-of-victims-of-human-
       Victim Identification Tool (for                                         trafficking/legacy_downloads/human-trafficking-identification-
       sex or labor trafficking)         VERA Institute of Justice             tool-spanish-version-short.doc.pdf
f.     Victim service provider intake                                          https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/4-supporting-
       and needs assessment              OVC TTAC                              victims/42-victim-service-provider-intake-and-needs-assessment/
A-5.
RELIGIOUS/ SPIRITUAL SELF-
DETERMINATION
                                                                               https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2010/11/22/2010-
Federal Guidance for Faith-Based         Federal Register- Executive Order     29579/fundamental-principles-and-policymaking-criteria-for-
Programs                                 13559                                 partnerships-with-faith-based-and-other
A-6.
CONFIDENTIALITY
                                                                               https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/3-operating-a-
a.     Maintaining confidentiality       OVC TTAC                              task-force/32-information-sharing/maintaining-confidentiality/
b.     Rules of Professional Conduct:
       Confidentiality and Informed      North Carolina State Bar              http://www.ncbar.gov/for-lawyers/ethics/rules-of-professional-
       Consent                                                                 conduct/rule-16-confidentiality-of-information/
c.     Resource page with
       confidentiality information                                             https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/3-operating-a-
       and tools                         OVC TTAC                              task-force/resources-32-information-sharing/
d.     Victim Assistant Training                                               https://www.ovcttac.gov/views/TrainingMaterials/dspOnline_VA
       Module on Confidentiality.        OVC TTAC                              TOnline.cfm
e.     Balancing Collaboration,
       Confidentiality, and Privilege                                          https://www.ovcttac.gov/downloads/webinars/HT/Webinar_2_J
       in Human Trafficking Cases        OVC TTAC                              une_18.mp4
f.     Training on protection of                                               https://law.lclark.edu/centers/national_crime_victim_law_institu
       victims’ rights.                  National Crime Victim Law Institute   te/projects/education_and_training/
g.     Technology & Confidentiality
       Resources Toolkit for
       Nonprofit Victim Service          National Network to End Domestic
       Agencies & Advocates              Violence                              https://www.techsafety.org/confidentiality
h.     Proper Data Collection and
       Analysis while maintaining                                              https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/3-operating-a-
       confidentiality                   OVC TTAC                              task-force/32-information-sharing/data-collection-analysis/
i.     Legal services for trafficking
       victims/ foreign nationals        Justice Matters North Carolina        https://www.justicemattersnc.org/

                                                                                                                                    59
     GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
GUIDE SECTION/TOPIC                       SOURCE ORGANIZATION /                   REFERENCE / ONLINE RESOURCE LINK
                                          AUTHOR
A-7.
SAFETY
                                          National Human Trafficking
a.     Safety planning for HT victims     Resource Center (NHTRC) - Polaris       http://www.traffickingresourcecenter.org/sites/default/files/Safe
       and survivors                      Project                                 ty%20Planning%20At%20A%20Glance.pdf
b.     Safety planning with sexual                                                https://www.victimrights.org/sites/default/files/Safety%20Planni
       assault survivors: A guide for                                             ng%20with%20Adult%20Sexual%20Assault%20Survivors_A%20G
       advocates and attorneys            Victim Rights Law Center                uide%20for%20Advocates%20and%20Attorneys.pdf
c.     Safety planning for individuals    Rape, Abuse, and Incest National
       who are being harmed               Network (RAINN)                         https://www.rainn.org/articles/safety-planning
d.     Family Plan, Raid Prep, and        Kentucky Equal Justice Center;
       Rights Information                 Maxwell Street Legal Clinic             http://maxlegalaid.kyequaljustice.org
e.     Guide to safe information                                                  https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/3-operating-a-
       sharing in regards to victims      OVC TTAC                                task-force/32-information-sharing/
f.     Resources and Information
       regarding rights for foreign
       nationals                          United We Dream                         www.unitedwedream.org
A-8.
NON-DISCRIMINATION

a.     Non-Discrimination Statement       The Denver Foundation                   http://nonprofitinclusiveness.org/
b.     FAQ’s related to limited
       English proficiency                Limited English Proficiency             https://www.lep.gov/faqs/faqs.html#OneQ7
c.     Resource       for     improving                                           https://polarisproject.org/sites/default/files/breaking-barriers-
       services for LGBTQ victims         Polaris                                 lgbtq-services.pdf
d.      Vulnerability     for   human     U.S. Department of State,
       trafficking among LGBTQ            Trafficking in Persons Report 2014,
       individuals                        p.10                                    https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/226844.pdf
                                                                                   https://www.endabusepwd.org/publications/end-abuse-pwd-
e.     Webinar series                     End Abuse of People with Disabilities   webinar-series/
                                                                                  https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/4-supporting-
f. Victim Populations Resources           OVC TTAC                                victims/resources-45-victim-populations/
A-9.
CULTURALLY & LINGUISTICALLY
APPROPRIATE
a. Overcoming language barriers                                                   https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/3-operating-a-
     and operational challenges                                                   task-force/34-addressing-common-operational-
     with survivors                       OVC TTAC                                challenges/overcoming-language-barriers/
b. Various definitions of cultural        National Center for Cultural
     competency                           Competence                              https://nccc.georgetown.edu/curricula/culturalcompetence.html
c. Cultural competency and                Katherine Van Wormer & Fred H.          Human Behavior and the Social Environment: Groups,
     cultural humility                    Besthorn                                Communities, and Organizations (2017)
d. An ally's guide to terminology
     when talking about LGBT              Movement Advancement Project
     people and equality                  (MAP)                                   https://www.lgbtmap.org/file/allys-guide-to-terminology.pdf
e. Explanation of LGBTQ terms             Los Angeles Conservancy                 https://www.laconservancy.org/explanation-lgbtq-terms
f. Resources for professional
     translators                          The Translation Company                 https://thetranslationcompany.com/resources.htm
g. A series of messaging guides
     for talking about LGBT issues        MAP                                     www.lgbtmap.org/messaging-guides
                                          Katy Steinmetz, “Why Latinx is
                                          Succeeding While Other Gender-
h.     Meaning and important of           Neutral Terms Fail to Catch On”,        http://time.com/5191804/latinx-definition-meaning-latino-
       Latinx                             Time Magazine, April 2, 2018            hispanic-gender-neutral/

                                                                                                                                          60
     GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
GUIDE SECTION/TOPIC                      SOURCE ORGANIZATION OR               REFERENCE / ONLINE RESOURCE LINK
                                         AUTHOR
A-10.
COLLABORATION
a. Webinar: Balancing                                                         https://www.ovcttac.gov/downloads/webinars/HT/Webinar_2_J
    Collaboration &Confidentiality       OVC TTAC                             une_18.mp4
                                                                              https://www.ovcttac.gov/taskforceguide/eguide/2-forming-a-
b.  Advantages of a task force           OVC TTAC                             task-force/21-advantages-of-a-task-force/
c.  South Carolina HT Task Force         South Carolina Statewide Human       http://humantrafficking.scag.gov/wp-
    2017 annual report                   Trafficking Task Force               content/uploads/2018/01/01559920.pdf
A-11.
ETHICS & PROFESSIONALISM
a. Federal Strategic Action Plan                                              https://www.ovc.gov/pubs/FederalHumanTraffickingStrategicPla
                                         OVC                                  n.pdf
b.     Reliable sources for statistics   Polaris                              https://polarisproject.org/initiatives
c.     Resources and data                OTIP                                 https://www.acf.hhs.gov/otip/resource-library/search
d.     Annual TIP Report                 U.S. Department of State             https://www.state.gov/j/tip/rls/tiprpt/
e.     Attorney General’s Annual                                              https://www.justice.gov/humantrafficking/attorney-generals-
       Report on Human Trafficking       U.S. Department of Justice           trafficking-persons-report
f.     Facts and statistics about                                             http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/forced-labour/lang--
       forced labor and trafficking      International Labor Organization     en/index.htm
                                                                              https://www.traffickingmatters.com/wp-
g.  2017 Federal Human                                                        content/uploads/2018/05/2017-Federal-Human-Trafficking-
    Trafficking Report                   Trafficking Matters                  Report_hi-res.pdf
h. Information about human               United Nations Office on Drugs and
    trafficking                          Crime                                http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/human-trafficking/index.html
i.  Social Media and Social Work
    Ethics                               Harbeck Voshel and Wesala            Journal of Social Work Values & Ethics, Spring 2015, Vol. 12, No. 1
j.  Tips regarding talking with the                                           http://www.crimevictimservices.org/uploads/2/7/2/9/27292133/
    media for survivors                  Media Guide for Survivors of Crime   media_guide_for_victims.pdf
k. Resource for responsible and
    accurate reporting of sex            The Irina Project at UNC School of
    trafficking                          Media and Journalism                 http://www.theirinaproject.org/
A-12.
SURVIVOR-INFORMED
a. Survivor-Informed Practice            2017 Human Trafficking Leadership    https://www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/otip/definition_and_
    Recommendations                      Academy                              recommendations.pdf
                                         Office of the Attorney General
b.     Survivor Leadership               Survivor's Council                   https://ag.ky.gov/victims/survivors-council
                                         Girls Education and Mentoring
d.   Survivor-Informed resources         Services                             http://www.gems-girls.org/
e.    Training and support for
     survivor leaders                    National Survivor Network            https://nationalsurvivornetwork.org/
f.    Training for survivor leaders      Rebecca Bender Initiative            http://www.rebeccabender.org/elevate/
g. Support for Sexual Assault
     Survivors                           The Survivor Alliance                https://www.thesurvivoralliance.com/
A-13.
 EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE
a. Database of Evidence-Based
     research                            National Institute of Justice        www.crimesolutions.gov
b. Database of Evidence-Based
     programming                         SAMHSA                               https://www.nrepp.samhsa.gov/landing.aspx



                                                                                                                                     61
     GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
GUIDE SECTION/TOPIC                SOURCE ORGANIZATION / AUTHOR                    REFERENCE / ONLINE RESOURCE LINK
A-14.
SUPPORT & SELF-CARE
a. Personality identification
    tool for self-awareness
    and further self-care          Enneagram Institute                             https://www.enneagraminstitute.com/
A-15.
TRAINING FOR PROVIDERS
                                                                                   https://ncjtc.fvtc.edu/training/details/TR00006011/TRI000
                                                                                   6016/trauma-informed-supervision-webinar-
                                                                                   series?utm_source=gotowebinar&utm_medium=email&ut
a.     Trauma-Informed                                                             m_campaign=2018-03-15%20-
       Supervision Webinar                                                         %20interacting%20with%20traumatized%20clients&utm_c
       Series                      NCJTC                                           ontent=attendees
b.     Interacting with
       Traumatized Clients: From
       Knowledge to Practice
       (Handout)                   NCJTC                                           https://ncjtc-static.fvtc.edu/resources/RS00006542.pdf
c.     Trends, Resources, and
       News on Human
       Trafficking                 Human Trafficking Matters                       https://www.traffickingmatters.com/home/
A-D.
STATE-SPECIFIC BEST
PRACTICE RESOURCES
                                                                                   http://voicesforflorida.org/wp-
                                                                                   content/uploads/2017/12/Statewide-Best-Practices-
                                                                                   Guidelines-to-Support-a-Continuum-of-Services-for-Victims-
a.     Florida                     Voices of Florida                               of-CSE-and-Sex-Trafficking.pdf
                                                                                   https://cjcc.georgia.gov/sites/cjcc.georgia.gov/files/related_
                                                                                   files/document/GA%20Child%20Sexual%20Abuse%20and%
b.     Georgia                     Georgia Criminal Justice Coordinating Council   20Exploitation%20Prevention%20Guide-6.28.17.pdf
                                   Tennessee
                                                                                   http://www.humantrafficking.ohio.gov/links/Service-
c.     Ohio                        Ohio Human Trafficking Commission               Standards.pdf




                                                                                                                                     62
     GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    APPENDIX B:
    Guiding Principle Example Documents
    Table of Contents
    B.1      Safety
             a) Rights Cards (English and Spanish)…………………………………………………………………………………………………….p.64

    B.2      Support and Self-Care for Professional Staff
             a) Self Awareness Worksheet Activity………………………………………………………………………………………..………….p.65

             b) The Enneagram…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..…………….p.66

    B.3      Survivor-Informed
             a) Job Description- Life Coach……………………………………………………………………………………………………………….p.67

    B.4      Training for Providers
             a) Qualifications for Community-Based Victim Advocates Working with Survivors………………………………..p.68

             b) Advanced Core Competencies…………………………………………………………………………………………………………..p.69




                                                                                                         63
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    B-1. Safety
    A) Rights Cards (English and Spanish)


                                RIGHTS CARD                                 TARJETA DE DERECHOS

           I am giving you this card because I do not wish to   Le estoy dando esta tarjeta porque no deseo
           speak to you or have any further contact with you.   hablar con usted o tener cualquier otro contacto
           I choose to exercise my right to remain silent and   con usted. Yo elijo ejercer mi derecho a guardar
           to refuse to answer your questions. If you arrest    silencio y negarme a responder a sus preguntas.
           me, I will continue to exercise my right to remain   Si me arrestan, seguiré ejerciendo mi derecho a
           silent and to refuse to answer your questions. I     guardar silencio y a negarme a responder sus
           want to speak with a lawyer before answering         preguntas. Quiero hablar con un abogado antes
           your questions.                                      de responder a cualquier preguntas.

           I want to contact this                               Quiero contactar este
           attorney or organization:                            abogado u organización:

           Telephone number:                                    Teléfono:




    Source: Maxwell Street Legal Clinic

                                                                                                                   64
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    B-2. Support and Self-care for Professional Staff
        A) Self-Awareness Worksheet Activity




    Source: Shannon Boyd, 2017
                                                                           65
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    B-2. Support and Self-care for Professional Staff
        B) The Enneagram
             An Overview of the Enneagram and Personality
             As you think about your personality, which of the following nine roles fits you best most of the time? Or,
             to put it differently, if you were to describe yourself in a few words, which of the following word clusters
             would come closest?




                                             *The Enneagram with Riso-Hudson Type Names


    These one-word descriptors can be expanded into four-word sets of traits. Keep in mind that these are merely
    highlights and do not represent the full spectrum of each type:


             1      Type One is principled, purposeful, self-controlled, and perfectionistic.
             2      Type Two is generous, demonstrative, people-pleasing, and possessive.
             3      Type Three is adaptable, excelling, driven, and image-conscious.
             4      Type Four is expressive, dramatic, self-absorbed, and temperamental.
             5      Type Five is perceptive, innovative, secretive, and isolated.
             6      Type Six is engaging, responsible, anxious, and suspicious.
             7      Type Seven is spontaneous, versatile, acquisitive, and scattered.
             8      Type Eight is self-confident, decisive, willful, and confrontational.
             9      Type Nine is receptive, reassuring, complacent, and resigned.


    If taken properly the Riso-Hudson Enneagram Type Indicator (RHETI version 2.5) will identify your basic personality
    type for you.




    Source: The Enneagram Institute

                                                                                                                       66
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    B-3. Survivor Informed
                  A) Life Coach Job Description
                                                      JOB DESCRIPTION

    JOB TITLE:         LIFE COACH

    PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITY:
    The Life Coach provides mentoring, support and advocacy to clients that have at been identified as being a survivor
    of commercial sexual exploitation. The Life coach also assists clients by teaching them how to navigate the
    behavioral health service system to achieve resiliency and recovery as defined by the client, as well as, independent
    living skills.

    EXAMPLES OF ACTUAL FUNCTIONS:
    (Note: The examples of work as listed in this class specification are not necessarily descriptive of any position in the
    class. The omission of specific statements does not preclude management from assigning specific duties not listed
    herein if such duties are a logical assignment to the position).

        1.   Serve as client advocate in program/agency activities.
        2.   Provide support to clients by using personal and professional life experience(s).
        3.   Advocate for and support clients in a caring and respectful manner.
        4.   Serve as a role model for clients.
        5.   Support clients in identifying needs that can be met through flexible funding.
        6.   Assist clients to identify and build natural supports as well as self-advocacy and self-efficacy skills.
        7.   Help clients identify strengths and recognize successes to promote self-esteem and empowerment.

    OTHER DUTIES:
      1. Attend all trainings, as mandated by the agency
      2. Ability to solve problems and interpret a variety of instructions furnished on written, oral, diagram or
         schedule form.
      3. Speak effectively before groups of family, youth, staff and community events.
      4. Ability to articulate wellness/recovery focused value and principles.
      5. Adaptability, cultural sensitivity, and understanding of the mental health and co-occurring population.
      6. Availability to work flexible hours and some holidays and weekends.

    MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
       1. High School Diploma/GED and at least six months relevant experience.
       2. Basic computer skills.
       3. Ability to read, write and speak English
       4. Continue personal education through staff development and training each year (i.e. WRAP, Peer Specialist,
          and Leadership).

    PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
       1. Reports demonstrate compliance with attendance and work schedule.
       2. Tasks assigned were followed through in a timely manner, as instructed by supervisor.
       3. No complaints from clients, team members and/or external agencies evidence that services rendered were
          performed professionally and efficiently.
       4. Training requirements were met or there is evidence of continuing education to achieve this requirement.

    Source: Florida Department of Children and Families




                                                                                                                         67
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    B-4. Training for Providers
        A) Standards for Working with Human Trafficking Survivors



                          Qualifications for Community-Based Victim Advocates
                               Working with Human Trafficking Survivors


    I. Fully Certified Community-Based Victim Advocate Requirements
    A fully certified community-based victim advocate is someone who is an active advocate already working in the
    field, who has already completed a minimum of 140 experiential direct services hours, and 60 hours of basic
    advocate training (which includes the following subject areas: Victim Topics [15hrs], Advocate Skills [15hrs],
    System Agency Response [15hrs], and Electives [15hrs].

    REQUIRED COURSES/TOPICS (five hours total):
    ▪ Colorado Human Trafficking 101 (120 minutes)
    ▪ Community-Based Victim Advocates and the Human Trafficking Survivor: This course must cover
    understanding service needs of human trafficking survivors, providing intensive case management,
    understanding challenges to service delivery, and utilizing local resources.
    ▪ Applying Trauma-Informed Care to Human Trafficking Cases


    ELECTIVE COURSES/TOPICS
    (at least five out of the seven content areas for a minimum of 10 hours)
    ▪ Human Trafficking in Rural Communities
    ▪ Overview of Labor Trafficking Cases
    ▪ Gang Involvement in Human Trafficking
    ▪ Child Trafficking
    ▪ Immigration Relief for Trafficking Survivors
    ▪ The Intersection Between Domestic Violence, Sexual Assault, and Child Sex Abuse and Human Trafficking
    ▪ The Importance of Collaboration in Human Trafficking Cases




    Source: Colorado Human Trafficking Council, Standards for Working with Human Trafficking Survivors, Community-Based
    Advocate, 2016
                                                                                                                          68
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
    B-4. Training for Providers
        B) Advanced Core Competencies




                                                Advanced Core Competencies

    Targeted Audience: Agencies, organizations, and service providers that specialize in serving and working with children
    and youth who have experienced or are at-risk of experiencing commercial sexual exploitation or sex trafficking.

    Specialized Working Knowledge of:
    1: Strategies to engage and effectively communicate with youth who have been sex trafficked.
    2: Terms and definitions common to different forms of commercial sexual exploitation and sex trafficking, including terms used by
    youth.
    3: Multiple entry points to commercial sexual exploitation and sex trafficking, which includes recruitment by pimps or bottoms,
    getting survival needs met, encouragement by peers, and solicitation by adults for sexual contact.
    4: Youth experiences while sexually exploited and sex trafficked, including experiencing repeated traumatic events and day-to-
    day realities.
    5: The varied experiences and forms of commercial sexual exploitation and sex trafficking of youth.
    6: The exit process for youth who are or have been commercially sexually exploited and sex trafficked.
    7: Reducing stigma and judgment of staff towards youth being served by programs, in addition to helping youth handle potential
    stigma from family, friends, and the community.
    8: Common family reactions to commercial sexual exploitation and sex trafficking and how to provide support and education to
    family members.
    9: Safety planning and harm reduction, including but not limited to assistance in terminating or managing relationships with
    people who have or could harm them.
    10: Importance to keep program details and location private and safe, in addition to active plans that abide by this working
    knowledge.
    11: Prevention of youth running away from home or placements.
    12: Recruitment methods utilized and a specific plan to interrupt recruitment within programs, placements, or other services.




    Source: Advanced Core Competencies, Wisconsin Anti-Human Trafficking Task Force, 2017




                                                                                                                                  69
GUIDING PRINCIPLES | For Agencies Serving Survivors of Human Trafficking
