                 Howard County
    Office of Human Trafficking Prevention
Human Trafficking Prevention Coordination Council
                   2024 Report
       WORKING TOGETHER
       The Office of Human Trafficking Prevention's mandate to
       work against sex and labor trafficking in Howard County is
       supported in part through the work of the Howard County
       Human Trafficking Prevention Coordination Council
       (HTPCC), an appointed and voluntary body which held its
       first meeting in December 2017. The HTPCC was made
       permanent by county legislation, (CB 52-2019) that took
       effect January 2020.


       The Office of Human Trafficking Prevention aligns with the
       values and standards of the Maryland Human Trafficking
       Task Force, partnering with anti-trafficking agencies and
       organizations which conform responsibly to best practices
       in the field.




    9830 Patuxent Woods Drive
    Columbia, MD 21046
    410-313-6400 (voice/relay)
    www.howardcountymd.gov/OHTP
    © howard county department of community resources and services


2      Howard County Human Trafficking Prevention Coordination Council
                      2024 ANNUAL REPORT

                    HOWARD COUNTY
Human Trafficking Prevention Coordination Council

         Department of Community Resources and Services




OVERVIEW and BACKGROUND
In 2014, Howard County commissioned the first Howard County
Human Trafficking Task Force. Task Force members concluded
that there was a strong basis to recommend increased services to
victims; human trafficking awareness education for everyone in
our community; and additional coordination between our various
partnering agencies and community-based organizations. 2017 saw
the creation of the Office of Human Trafficking Prevention within
the Department of Community Resources and Services (DCRS) and
the implementation of an Executive Order establishing the Howard
County Human Trafficking Prevention Coordination Council (HTPCC).
The Executive Order required the Council to conduct the following
activities: review and prioritize the recommendations of the Human
Trafficking Task Force Report of 2014 and advise the County
Executive on effective methods and organizational structure to
permanently coordinate and sustain human trafficking prevention
efforts in the County. The Coordination Council began meeting in
mid-2017 focused on these tasks. The HTPCC was made permanent
by County legislation in 2019 (CB 52-2019) and remains staffed by
the DCRS Office of Human Trafficking Prevention. In late 2019, the
HTPCC and DCRS issued a multi-year report to the County Executive
making several recommendations regarding the HTPCC, DCRS’
OHTP and future efforts against trafficking.

The HTPCC is a diverse body of Howard County residents,
professionals and service providers who are charged with
helping to identify the need for increased awareness, education,
survivor support and collaboration, in conjunction with the OHTP
coordinator. HTPCC meetings and activities to date have included
six regular full-council meetings and numerous sub-committee
meetings that meet on a bimonthly basis. The Council is fortunate to
have many partners in addition to the ones mentioned previously.
These include healthcare, homeless services and foreign-born
focused entities which provide services and resources to members
of the Howard County community.




                                                HTPCC Annual Report and Work Plan for 2024   1
                        A Letter from the Chair of the HTPCC
                        2024 was a year of transition, reorganization, growth,
                        and success for the Human Trafficking Prevention
                        Coordination Council.


                        The Council partnered with the Howard County Office of Constituent
                        Services to recruit new members for both community engagement
                        and professional appointments. As a result, four new applicants
                        have joined, each bringing valuable expertise and perspective to the
                        HTPCC. In addition, several members were reappointed, ensuring
                        continued representation from all mandated entities, as well as
                        members-at-large from the broader community and local businesses.

                        One of the year’s major accomplishments was the re-establishment
                        of our subcommittee structure. The four subcommittees include
                        Legislative, Training, Outreach and Prevention, and Screening
                        Assessment Tool. Each will focus on advancing policy at the county,
                        state, and federal levels, strengthening training and outreach within
                        Howard County, and developing identification tools for service
                        providers supporting survivors of human trafficking. In addition, the
                        reactivation of the CORE Team subcommittee created valuable space
                        for direct service providers to collaborate on complex cases and
                        identify gaps within existing systems.

                        Collectively, The Office of Human Trafficking Prevention (OHTP)
                        and HTPCC began a partnership and working relationship with a
                        large national support agency (TAT). Through an outstanding virtual
                        presentation to the Council, they outlined various opportunities
                        for future collaboration on human trafficking and labor trafficking
                        awareness events here in Howard County and the Greater Baltimore
                        region. We also supported efforts by OHTP in bringing a very
                        successful Partner2Prevent event and virtual film discussion of
                        the documentary “Shattered Dreams” during Human Trafficking
                        Awareness and Prevention Month in January.

                        As we look forward, the Council is excited to focus on action-
                        oriented and solutions-focused work and to continue to support
                        the outstanding efforts of the Howard County Office of Human
                        Trafficking Prevention.

                        Respectfully,

                        Chuck Chandler
                        2024-2025 HTPCC Chair




2   Howard County Human Trafficking Prevention Coordination Council
SUBCOMMITTEES
In 2024, the HTPCC began efforts to reestablish and strengthen
its subcommittee structure to improve strategic coordination
and enhance the Council’s long-term impact. This included the
reactivation of the CORE Team Subcommittee, which brings together
key service partners to discuss case-sensitive services and active
trafficking concerns; the Legislative Subcommittee, which tracks
and informs local and state policy efforts; and the creation of a new
subcommittee dedicated to developing a standardized Screening
and Assessment Tool. This new tool is intended to support early
identification of potential trafficking victims and promote consistent,
best-practice service responses across partner agencies.


CORE Team Meetings
The CORE Team Subcommittee reconvened in April 2024 and met
on a bi-monthly basis, totaling five meetings throughout the year.
Initially established through the OVC Enhanced Collaborative Model
(ECM) Grant, the purpose of the CORE Team is to bring together
key direct service partners for coordinated case review, discussion
of emerging trends, identification of service and system gaps, and
collaborative support on active and ongoing human trafficking cases
in Howard County. All members of the subcommittee have signed
confidentiality agreements to ensure the secure and ethical handling
of case information. Participating agencies include the Department
of Community Resources and Services (DCRS), the Office of Human
Trafficking Prevention (OHTP), the Howard County Police Department
(HCPD), the Child Advocacy Center (CAC), HopeWorks of Howard
County, and TurnAround Inc.




                                                  HTPCC Annual Report and Work Plan for 2024   3
      Human Trafficking Prevention Coordination Council
      REPRESENTED MEMBERSHIP
      The HTPCC consists of 19 to 23 members and designees.
      Representative from the Director of the
        Department of Community Resources and Services...........................................Jacqueline R. Scott
      Representative from the Administrator of the
        Office of Human Rights and Equity .......................................................................Yolanda Sonnier
      Representative from the State’s Attorney's Office. .................................................Rich Gibson
      Representative from the Chief of Police...................................................................Chief Gregory Der
      Representative from the Howard County Commission for Women.....................Jessica Epps
      Representative from the Director of the Department of Social Services.............Geneva Rieu
      Health Officer or the Health Officer’s designee.......................................................Ilise D. Marrazzo, MPH, RN
      Representative from the Sheriff's Department. ......................................................Dina Ward
      Representative from the Howard County Public School System. .........................Lauren Blake, EdD


      Appointed members of the private sector shall include:
      Two representatives from the faith-based community..........................................Vinitha Nithianandam
      Representative from HoCo AGAST (Howard County Advocacy Group
        Against Slavery and Trafficking) or similar group who providing
        intervention and advocacy on behalf of human trafficking victims . ................Sara Cochran
      Representative from HopeWorks..............................................................................appointment pending
      Representative from a non-profit agency providing
        services to human trafficking survivors (TurnAround, Inc.)................................appointment pending
      Representative from Grassroots Crisis Intervention Center; ................................appointment pending
      Representative from the Howard County General Hospital .................................appointment pending
      Two representatives from the survivor community . .............................................appointment pending
      Representative from the general public...................................................................appointment pending
      Representative from the business community. ......................................................Chuck Chandler




4   Howard County Human Trafficking Prevention Coordination Council
Trafficking Prevention Coordination Council
ACTIVITIES, HIGHLIGHTS AND TRAININGS
Human Trafficking Awareness and Prevention Month 2024
In January 2024, the HTPCC hosted two key events for Human Trafficking Awareness and Prevention
Month: the Partner2Prevent panel discussion and a virtual film discussion of the documentary
“Shattered Dreams.” The panel brought together local partners to examine how human trafficking
presents in Howard County, highlight collaborative efforts in survivor support, and discuss targeted
prevention strategies. The film discussion centered on lived experiences of survivors featured in the
documentary, prompting dialogue on lessons for community and service response.

Training and Outreach
• Throughout the year, HTPCC members expanded outreach and training efforts to reach diverse
  communities and professional sectors. This included targeted trainings for the AAPI community,
  older adults, and the beginning of a new outreach initiative to train HCPSS Student Support Staff.
  The Council remains committed to increasing awareness and strengthening prevention efforts
  across the county.

• In 2024, a new partnership was introduced between the HTPCC and TAT (formerly known
  as Truckers Against Trafficking). TAT provided a virtual informational presentation to HTPCC
  members, outlining opportunities for future collaboration, training, and community engagement.
  With successful partnerships already established across Maryland, TAT is eager to build new
  relationships in Howard County to support anti-trafficking efforts and expand their impact.

• In the fall of 2024, members of the Council conducted outreach at both the northbound and
  southbound Maryland Welcome Centers along I-95. At the southbound rest stop, members
  engaged directly with truck drivers and Welcome Center staff, distributing educational
  materials and confirming the display of large National Human Trafficking Hotline public service
  announcements in restroom areas.

• Members of the Council distributed Liberty Act cards and Know Your Rights (KYR) cards to
  organizations attending HTPCC meetings, as well as to educators, faith-based communities,
  business representatives, and community members across Howard County. Human trafficking
  awareness materials were also shared with immigration-focused organizations serving residents
  in the county, furthering community education and engagement around this issue.

HTPCC Membership
• The Council continued to prioritize membership growth and inclusion, particularly in recruiting
  survivor leaders. Several new members have been appointed, helping to ensure diverse
  perspectives and representation from key sectors across the community.




                                                                HTPCC Annual Report and Work Plan for 2024   5
                        IN CONCLUSION
                        In 2024, the Howard County Human Trafficking Prevention
                        Coordination Council (HTPCC) expanded its outreach, training, and
                        collaborative engagement strategies to better serve historically
                        underserved populations and strengthen its internal capacity.
                        In partnership with the Office of Human Trafficking Prevention
                        (OHTP), the Council delivered targeted presentations and trainings
                        to a diverse range of audiences, including members of the Asian
                        American and Pacific Islander (AAPI) community, older adults, and
                        school-based professionals across Howard County. These efforts
                        helped increase awareness of trafficking indicators and response
                        strategies in culturally relevant and age-appropriate ways.
                        The Council strengthened outreach to AAPI communities through
                        a growing partnership with the Asian Pacific American Legal
                        Resource Center (APALRC), whose linguistic and cultural expertise
                        supported meaningful engagement and resource dissemination.
                        In parallel, the HTPCC began establishing connections with TAT to
                        explore prevention strategies within industries vulnerable to labor
                        exploitation.

                        Recognizing the importance of centering survivor voices, the Council
                        prioritized relationship-building with survivor leaders and advocates.
                        Notably, collaboration began with Restoring Ivy, a survivor-led
                        organization providing clinical and systems-level expertise. These
                        partnerships reflect the Council’s growing commitment to trauma-
                        informed, survivor-informed approaches to policy and outreach.

                        To strengthen local understanding of labor trafficking, the Council
                        supported research efforts by Choice Research Associates, whose
                        work provided data-driven insight into risk factors and barriers to
                        identification across Maryland. The HTPCC, in partnership with the
                        OHTP, also continued its collaboration with Centro de los Derechos
                        del Migrante (CDM), utilizing their national expertise to inform
                        outreach and education strategies for migrant and contract labor
                        communities.

                        Internally, the HTPCC took active steps to reestablish several of its
                        subcommittees, foster deeper engagement with survivor leaders,
                        and fill remaining open appointments to ensure diverse and
                        representative leadership within the Council.

                        Together, these efforts reflect the Council’s ongoing dedication to
                        fostering a coordinated, inclusive, and evidence-based approach to
                        human trafficking prevention throughout Howard County.




6   Howard County Human Trafficking Prevention Coordination Council
Goals for 2025
These goals reflect the Council’s ongoing commitment to fostering a coordinated,
inclusive, and survivor-informed approach to preventing human trafficking in
Howard County.


As the Howard County Human Trafficking Prevention Coordination Council (HTPCC) reflects on the
progress made throughout 2024, it remains committed to advancing its original recommendations
while setting forth new goals that will guide its work in 2025. Looking ahead, the Council will focus
on the following priorities:

• Center Survivor Leadership and Membership on the Council
	Continue to build intentional partnerships with survivors and individuals with lived
  experience, ensuring their voices inform outreach, community engagement, and
  collaborative initiatives.


• Reinforce Subcommittee Infrastructure
	Strengthen and expand the Council’s subcommittee structure to better address the diverse
  needs of Howard County’s communities and support targeted, responsive approaches to
  prevention and intervention.


• Create a Countywide Screening and Assessment Tool
	Develop and implement a standardized screening and assessment tool for direct service
  providers to improve the identification of potential trafficking victims and ensure consistent,
  best-practice responses across agencies.


• Enhance Community Collaboration
	Identify and pursue opportunities to deepen relationships with local partners and
  stakeholders, with a focus on cross-sector collaboration to strengthen anti-trafficking efforts
  and increase public awareness.


• Advance Awareness for Vulnerabilities to Trafficking
	Expand outreach efforts to meet the needs of populations most vulnerable to human
  trafficking, using best-practice, victim-centered approaches that prioritize cultural
  responsiveness and equity.

       1) Build Council Capacity: Work closely with County Administration to fill vacant Council
          appointments and ensure a fully representative, engaged, and effective membership body.
       2) Plan Events for Human Trafficking Prevention and Awareness Month for 2025: Begin work
          on planning a Council-led event for January of 2025.




                                                                 HTPCC Annual Report and Work Plan for 2024   7
    PARTNER2PREVENT 2024




                                                                       The Partner2Prevent 2024 event featured
                                                                       welcome remarks from County Executive
                                                                       Calvin Ball, representatives from community
                                                                       partners and a panel of experts in the
                                                                       fight against human trafficking. Top
                                                                       photo, L to R, Lisa Terry, Ashton Petta,
                                                                       Jackie Scott, and Cheryl Mattis from the
                                                                       Department of Community Resources and
                                                                       Services. Pictured above, Petta facilitated
                                                                       the panel discussion. At left, Howard
                                                                       County Executive, Calvin Ball (center) with
                                                                       staff member, Hamzah Yousef, Ashton
                                                                       Petta, and representatives from the
                                                                       Maryland Transportation Authority Police
                                                                       Department.

                                                                       Opposite Page, top left, Amanda Rodriquez,
                                                                       CEO, TurnAround, Inc. addresses the room.
                                                                       Center photo, Mirella Beltram, Polaris, takes
                                                                       questions from attendees.
                                                                       Top right, Lt. Eric Kruhm, Howard County
                                                                       Police Department addresses safety
                                                                       concerns and how the HCPD are responding
                                                                       to the fight against human trafficking.

                                                                       At right, attendees took home the
                                                                       latest updates and information from
                                                                       Partner2Prevent 2024.


8    Howard County Human Trafficking Prevention Coordination Council
HTPCC Annual Report and Work Plan for 2024   9
Department of Community Resources and Services
9830 Patuxent Woods Drive, Columbia, MD 21046
410-313-6400 (voice/relay)
www.howardcountymd.gov/OHTP
     If you need this information in an alternate format, contact the Office of Human Trafficking
              Prevention at 410-313-6558 (voice/relay) or ohtp@howardcountymd.gov.
                     © howard county department of community resources and services
