                 Human Trafficking &
                 Church Engagement
                     (U.S. Focus)




“La Gabbia” (The Cage) by auroraMeccanica
CONTENTS



       What Is Human Trafficking?		                  3-8

		Definitions				3
		 Trafficking in the U.S.		 4
		Statistics				4
		Myths					5-7
		A Biblical Foundation		8

       Church Engagement			9-16

		Prevention				9-14
		Protection				15
		Prosecution				15
		Partnership				16
		Prayer					16


       What Can Our Church Support?                  17-18


       Appendix:
       A Few Things to Consider		                    19




Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 2
Before You Begin

This is designed to be an introduction to human trafficking and resource guide for
church engagement. No church can be expected to do—or should do—everything
listed here. Pray together about how your church might engage in the issue of
human trafficking and modern-day slavery based on your passions and the ways
your members are skilled and equipped. Take one step at a time. Engagement in
this issue should be approached as a marathon, not a sprint.


What Is Human Trafficking?

Definitions

In short, human trafficking is a form of modern slavery where people profit from the
control and exploitation of other people. (Polaris Project)

It’s a criminal enterprise in which both children and adults are bought and sold into
forced labor or sexual exploitation through force, fraud, or coercion. It is a global
problem that affects people from many backgrounds or situations in almost every country
in the world, including the United States.

We can no longer look at human trafficking as a problem that happens in “other places.”
It’s a problem that exists in our own backyards.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Polaris Project defines human trafficking through the A-M-P model.

 ACTION                                             +           MEANS               =   PURPOSE
 Recruiting, harboring, trans-  Force, fraud, coercion                                  Commercial sexual exploita-
 porting, providing, obtaining,                                                         tion (prostitution, creation
 or attempts to complete these                                                          of pornography, and sexual
 actions                                                                                performance)
                                                                                        OR
                                                                                        Labor/services (including
                                                                                        involuntary servitude and debt
                                                                                        bondage)

* Any minor engaged in commercial sex is considered a victim of trafficking regardless of
whether force, fraud, or coercion is used.

Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                                                3
Trafficking in the United States

According to Polaris Project, victims of human trafficking come from various racial,
ethnic, geographic, and economic backgrounds. Victims are male and female. They
come from big cities and small towns. They are foreign nationals and those who were
born and raised in the U.S. They may be documented or undocumented. They are highly
educated and also uneducated.

Victims are often lured by empty promises of a job, stability, or education, but they are
also lured through the promise of a loving relationship. They all share one thing in
common: vulnerability.

Children or youth who are homeless or have run away are extremely vulnerable to
commercial sexual exploitation. Children who have experienced sexual or physical abuse
are also vulnerable. The average age a child enters into commercial sex is 12 to 14.

In addition, people are at risk if they are victims of domestic violence or sexual assault
and if they experience social isolation or discrimination.

Foreign nationals are also at risk. Often, they have paid large sums of money to labor
recruiters for job placements. Not only are they highly indebted, but their identification,
documents, and even money are also confiscated, making it nearly impossible for the
workers (many of whom speak little English) to leave.


Statistics

Statistics related to human trafficking are highly difficult to obtain and verify; however,
various expert organizations offer these numbers as a starting point:

• There are approximately 21 million victims of human trafficking globally, including 5.5 million
   children; 14 million are trafficked into forced labor. (ILO)
• About 4.5 million people are forced into commercial sexual exploitation globally. (ILO)
• Human trafficking generates $150 billion in profits globally. (ILO)
• 600,000 to 800,000 people are trafficked across international borders each year; of those,
   80% are female and 50% are children. (U.S. State Department)
• An estimated 100,000 children are involved commercial sex each year. (Polaris Project)
• An estimated 300,000 children in the U.S. are at risk of being trafficked for sexual
   exploitation. (U.S. Department of Justice)
• Approximately 40-70% of suspected child victims of trafficking come from foster care, group
   homes, or other shelters.
• The average cost of a modern-­day slave is $90. (Free the Slaves)

Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)
                                                  4
Myths About Human Trafficking

Polaris Project points out 10 common myths about human trafficking:


MYTH 1: Trafficked persons can only be foreign nationals or are only immigrants from
        other countries.

REALITY: The federal definition of human trafficking includes both U.S. citizens and
          foreign nationals. Both are protected under the federal trafficking statutes and
          have been since the TVPA of 2000. Human trafficking within the United States
          affects victims who are U.S. citizens, lawful permanent residents, visa holders,
          and undocumented workers.



MYTH 2: Human trafficking is essentially a crime that must involve some form of travel,
        transportation, or movement across state or national borders.

REALITY: Trafficking does not require transportation. Although transportation may be
          involved as a control mechanism to keep victims in unfamiliar places, it is not
          a required element of the trafficking definition. Human trafficking is not synony-
          mous with forced migration or smuggling, which involve border crossing.



MYTH 3: Human trafficking is another term for human smuggling.

REALITY: Smuggling is a crime against a country’s borders: human trafficking is a crime
          against a person. These are distinct federal crimes in the United States. While
          smuggling requires illegal border crossing, human trafficking involves commer-
          cial sex acts or labor or services that are induced through force, fraud, or
          coercion, regardless of whether or not transportation occurs.



MYTH 4: There must be elements of physical restraint, physical force, or physical
        bondage when identifying a human trafficking situation.

REALITY: Trafficking does not require physical restraint, bodily harm, or physical force.


Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)
                                                5
          Psychological means of control, such as threats, fraud, or abuse of the legal
          process, are sufficient elements of the crime. Unlike the previous federal invol-
          untary servitude statutes (U.S.C.1584), the new federal crimes created by the
          Trafficking Victims Protection Act (TVPA) of 2000 were intended to address “sub-
          tler” forms of coercion and to broaden previous standards that only considered
          bodily harm.



MYTH 5: Victims of human trafficking will immediately ask for help or assistance and will
        self-­identify as a victim of a crime.

REALITY: Victims of human trafficking often do not immediately seek help or self-­identify as
          victims of a crime due to a variety of factors, including lack of trust, self-blame,
          or specific instructions by the traffickers regarding how to behave when talking
          to law enforcement or social services. It is important to avoid making a snap
          judgment about who is or who is not a trafficking victim based on first encoun-
          ters. Trust often takes time to develop. Continued trust-building and patient
          interviewing is often required to get to the whole story and uncover the full
          experience of what a victim has gone through.



MYTH 6: Human trafficking victims always come from situations of poverty or from small
        rural villages.

REALITY: Although poverty can be a factor in human trafficking because it is often an
          indicator of vulnerability, poverty alone is not a single causal factor or universal
          indicator of a human trafficking victim. Trafficking victims can come from
          a range of income levels, and many may come from families with higher
          socioeconomic status.



MYTH 7: Sex trafficking is the only form of human trafficking.

REALITY: The federal definition of human trafficking encompasses both trafficking and
          labor trafficking, and the crime can affect men and women, children and adults.




Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 6
MYTH 8: Human trafficking only occurs in illegal underground industries.

REALITY: Trafficking can occur in legal and legitimate business settings as well as
          underground markets. Human trafficking has been reported in business markets
          such as restaurants, hotels, and manufacturing plants, as well as underground
          markets such as commercial sex in residential brothels and street based
          commercial sex.



MYTH 9: If the trafficked person consented to be in their initial situation or was informed
        about what type of labor they would be doing or that commercial sex would be
        involved, then it cannot be human trafficking or against their will because they
        “knew better.”

REALITY: Initial consent to commercial sex or a labor setting prior to acts of force, fraud,
          or coercion (or if the victim is a minor in a sex trafficking situation) is not relevant
          to the crime, nor is payment.



MYTH 10: Foreign national trafficking victims are always undocumented immigrants or
         here in this country illegally.

REALITY: Not all foreign national victims are undocumented. Foreign national trafficked
          persons can be in the United States through either legal or illegal means.
          Although some foreign national victims are undocumented, a significant
          percentage may have legitimate visas for various purposes.



									(from polarisproject.org)




Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                7
A Biblical Foundation

In Scripture, we can start at the beginning as we seek to address the problem of human
trafficking. Genesis 1:27 says, “So God created humankind in his image, in the image of
God he created them; male and female he created them” (NRSV).

We care about the issue of trafficking and modern slavery because we believe that every
single person, whether child or adult, female or male, is made in God’s image and is,
therefore, valuable and worthy of dignity. Human trafficking dehumanizes people, turning
them into objects and commodities. Our hope is to see people restored into the fullness of
who God created them to be.

We also follow in the ways of Jesus, who announced His mission as Messiah this way:

		“The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
   because he has anointed me
   to bring good news to the poor.
   He has sent me to proclaim release to the captives
   and recovery of sight to the blind,
   to let the oppressed go free,
   to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favor.”
   		(Luke 4:18-19, NRSV)

This is still Jesus’ call to us.

Scripture also issues a call for us to advocate on behalf of those whose voices are
quieted through oppression: “Speak out for those who cannot speak, for the rights of all
the destitute. Speak out, judge righteously, defend the rights of the poor and needy”
(Proverbs 31:8-9, NRSV).

Finally, in the book of Amos, God names sins of oppression that He despises: “… They
sell the innocent for silver, and the needy for a pair of sandals. They trample on the
heads of the poor as on the dust of the ground and deny justice to the oppressed” (Amos
2:6-7). He calls us to engage in a different vision: “But let justice roll down like waters,
and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream” (Amos 5:24).

As a member of the Wesleyan Holiness Consortium, the Church of the Nazarene helped
craft and has endorsed the consortium’s Declaration for Freedom (available in the
Resources section of ncm.org/trafficking). This declaration offers a deeper theological
look at why the church should be actively engaged in the issue of human trafficking.


Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 8
Church Engagement

The U.S. Department of State talks about anti-trafficking engagement through the 3 P’s:
prevention, protection, and prosecution. As the church, we should add 2 additional P’s:
partnership and prayer.

Following are ways your congregation can begin to engage with the issue of exploitation
through the 5 P’s:


PREVENTION & AWARENESS


AWARENESS

Learn to recognize the signs of trafficking and identify victims. These come
from Polaris Project (polarisproject.org).

Common Work and Living Conditions: The Individual(s) in Question

       • Is not free to leave or come and go as he/she wishes
       • Is under 18 and is providing commercial sex acts
       • Is in the commercial sex industry and has a pimp / manager
       • Is unpaid, paid very little, or paid only through tips
       • Works excessively long and/or unusual hours
       • Is not allowed breaks or suffers under unusual restrictions at work
       • Owes a large debt and is unable to pay it off
       • Was recruited through false promises concerning the nature and conditions of
         his/her work
       • High security measures exist in the work and/or living locations (e.g. opaque
         windows, boarded up windows, bars on windows, barbed wire, security cam-
         eras, etc.)

Poor Mental Health or Abnormal Behavior

       • Is fearful, anxious, depressed, submissive, tense, or nervous/paranoid
       • Exhibits unusually fearful or anxious behavior after bringing up law enforcement
       • Avoids eye contact




Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 9
Poor Physical Health

        • Lacks health care
        • Appears malnourished
        • Shows signs of physical and/or sexual abuse, physical restraint, confinement,
          or torture

Lack of Control

        • Has few or no personal possessions
        • Is not in control of his/her own money, no financial records, or bank account
        • Is not in control of his/her own identification documents (ID or passport)
        • Is not allowed or able to speak for themselves (a third party may insist on being
          present and/or translating)

Other

        • Claims of just visiting and inability to clarify where he/she is staying/address
        • Lack of knowledge of whereabouts and/or do not know what city he/she is in
        • Loss of sense of time
        • Has numerous inconsistencies in his/her story

This list is not exhaustive and represents only a selection of possible indicators. Also, the
red flags in this list may not be present in all trafficking cases and are not cumulative.
Learn more at the Trafficking Resource Center (traffickingresourcecenter.org).

Certain groups are particularly at-risk for becoming victims of human trafficking:
       • Youth who are abused or have run away
       • Youth who age out of foster care
       • Children involved in the juvenile justice system
       • Adults who are unable to find a sufficient employment
       • Individuals who are isolated and without social safety nets
       • Women experiencing domestic violence or assault

Research your local context. Research to see if there is a human trafficking task
force in your area. Task forces are typically made of law enforcement, social service pro-
viders, legal service providers, community members, nonprofits, and faith-based groups.
Find out if the meetings are open to the public. If so, attending these meetings will provide
information and contacts for collaboration. You can also contact your local law enforce-
ment and ask, “How can we help?”


Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 10
Learn together about the problem of human trafficking. These are helpful
resources to begin:

       • Faith Alliance Against Slavery and Trafficking (FAAST) offers free toolkits and
         curriculum for churches, communities, and schools. There are two helpful Bible
         studies, including one that focuses on the issue of exploitation in the Bible and
         one that focuses on the issue of human trafficking from a biblical perspective.
         FAAST also offers a very in-depth curriculum called Hands That Heal focused
         on care for survivors of trafficking; Nazarene churches can access that resource
         free by contacting Nazarene Compassionate Ministries. (faastinternational.org)

       • Polaris Project and their National Human Trafficking Resource Center is a
         go-to source for professional research about trafficking in the United States.
         (polarisproject.org)

       • Another helpful site focused on trafficking in the U.S. is humantraffickingusa.org.

       • Vanguard University’s Global Center for Women and Justice offers more than
         100 podcasts focused on human trafficking (www.vanguard.edu/gcwj). You
         can also access them through Stitcher.com.

       • There are many documentaries and films that address the problem of human
         trafficking, particularly in the U.S., including Trade of Innocents, The Candy
         Shop, Chosen, In Plain Sight, and Not for Sale. Consider hosting a showing
         at your church.


PREVENTION

Prevention is a crucial area of engagement, and it’s one that the church is ideally posi-
tioned to do. Traffickers prey on people who are vulnerable. Certain groups are partic-
ularly at risk for becoming victims of human trafficking, including youth who have been
abused or have run away, youth who age out of foster care, children in the juvenile jus-
tice system, adults struggling to find employment, individuals who are isolated and don’t
have social safety nets, and women who have experienced domestic violence or assault.

The church can fill a great void by working to prevent people from becoming victims
through education and by meeting needs of those who are at-risk.



Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 11
National Trafficking Hotline: (888) 373-7888. The line is open 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week, and there are interpreters who can translate into more than 200
languages. Learn more about the National Human Trafficking Resource Center at
traffickingresourcecenter.org. You can also text BeFree (233733).

Suspected incidents of trafficking can also be reported to the Department of Justice
Trafficking in Persons and Worker Exploitation Task Force Complaint Line at
(888) 428-7581 or by contacting your local FBI office. You can also report the
production or distribution of child pornography or suspected trafficking to the National
Center of Missing and Exploited Children’s Child Pornography and Sexual Exploitation
Tipline: 1-800-843-5678.

Consider creating small cards with the information so church members can keep it in their
wallets.


Educate your leaders and volunteers. Educate people serving in ministries for
at-risk children and youth, homeless individuals and families, people in detention centers,
etc. to identify and report suspicious activities.


Teach children how to be safer online. Netsmartz (netsmartz.org) offers good
guidelines.


Fight the demand. Human trafficking is a big-money business. It ties with the global
arms trade as the second-largest criminal income producer worldwide. And the U.S. cul-
ture and our actions actually drive demand for slave labor and commercial sex.

       • You can learn more about the connection between pornography and sex
          trafficking at pornharmsresearch.com.

       • The Defenders USA (sharedhope.org) and The X3Network (x3pure.com) help
         fight the demand for commercial sex trafficking by addressing the struggle with
         pornography or sexual addiction.

       • Learn about the connection between consumerism and labor trafficking from
         the Global Slavery Index (globalslaveryindex.org) and Slavery Footprint
         (productsofslavery.org). These sites are tools to understand the problem,
         responses, and contributing factors related to labor trafficking.

Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 12
       • Better World Shopper (betterworldshopper.com) and Free2Work (free2work.
         org) encourage you to vote with your dollars. Companies are rated based on
         human rights (sweatshops, child labor, exploitation). There is also a mobile app
         version for each site.

       • Become a compassionate consumer. You can find ethical shopping guides that
         list companies with fair labor practices at Fair Trade USA (fairtradeusa.org),
         End Slavery Now (endslaverynow.org), and Micah Challenge USA
         (micahchallengeusa.org). Search for Micah Challenge’s “Ethical Shopping
         Guide.”


Start with your youth and children. Train your youth and children’s leaders, and
teach your church’s own youth and children how to protect themselves against people
who would seek to exploit them.

       • The Faith Alliance Against Slavery and Trafficking (FAAST) offers an age-ap-
         propriate Bible study geared toward children ages 8 to 11 called “Change
         Agents” (faastinternational.org). There is a fee charged for this study.

       • Born2Fly offers an in-depth curriculum geared toward youth and children in 10
         different languages (born2fly.org). These resources are free, but you will have to
         register in order to download them.


Minister to children and youth in the foster care system. Children and youth in
the foster care system are targeted by traffickers because of their need for love and pro-
tection. Studies estimate that between 40% and 70% of children involved in commercial
sexual exploitation are or were part of the child welfare system.

       • Many states allow individuals to go through training and become a Court
         Appointed Special Advocate for children in the foster care system.

       • Contact a foster care agency in your area and ask what your church can do to
         help foster youth, particularly those who are aging out of the system.

       • Consider becoming a Safe Families for Children church (safe-families.org).



Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 13
Engage in ministry to at-risk groups. Traffickers prey on and exploit those who
are most vulnerable, including youth who have run away or have aged out of foster care,
children in the juvenile justice system, adults who are economically vulnerable, and wom-
en experience domestic violence or assault. They also prey on children and youth who
feel lonely and unloved. Ideas for ministry that helps to lessen vulnerability include these:

       • Create after-school ministries that become safe places for children.

       • Do job skills training to increase opportunities for people who are unemployed
         or underemployed.

       • Commit as a church to engage in mentoring programs that work to support
         youth in your area.

       • Encourage people in your church to serve as a Guardian Ad Litem or Court
         Appointed Special Advocate (CASA) for vulnerable children (if your state allows
         for these programs).

       • Partner with or encourage church members to volunteer with organizations in
         your community that minister to other at-risk children, youth, or adults, such as
         shelters for battered women, pregnancy resource centers, homeless shelters, etc.

       • Build relationships with local law enforcement to understand your local context
         and talk about how your church can support their efforts to fight trafficking.

       • Consider designating a church member or team to oversee and coordinate all
         anti-trafficking volunteer opportunities.


Understand trauma. Becoming a trauma-informed congregation will help your church
know how to minister to anyone who has experienced significant trauma, including survi-
vors of trafficking as well as children and youth whose trauma may put them at increased
risk for being trafficked. Seek training in your community from a mental health profession-
al or social worker with expertise.

       • Helpful resources include ACEs Too High (acestoohigh.com) and ACEs
         Connection (acesconnection.com), both focused on trauma cause by adverse
         childhood experience.




Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 14
PROTECTION

Partner with reputable direct-care services, such as emergency shelters or residential
homes for rehabilitation and restoration, in your area.

       • Do a gift card drive, based on the needs of a specific organization.

       • Put together care packages (again, based on needs of an organization)

       • Offer to sponsor an event for residents of a restoration home.

       • Encourage members to donate professional services, such as medical or dental
         care, legal assistance, accounting, marketing, or grant writing as needed.

       • Homes may also need skills including transportation, tutoring, life skills, job
         skills, teaching Bible studies, gardening, etc. that your members can provide.

       • Encourage members of your congregation to offer jobs or internships to
         graduates of restoration homes.



PROSECUTION

The laws related to human trafficking determine how law enforcement engages with the
issue and how well equipped they are to arrest suspected traffickers.

       • Your church can become educated about laws related to trafficking at the local,
         state, and national level.

       • Engage with elected officials at the local, state, and national level to let them
         know you care about the problem of human trafficking and to encourage them
         to help prevent it through policies and laws. Write letters, make phone calls, or
         arrange in-person meetings.

       • Visit sharedhope.org/policy to learn about state and federal legislation aimed at
         addressing the problems of human trafficking, child sex trafficking, commercial
         sexual exploitation, child welfare, and similar issues.


Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 15
PARTNERSHIP

The best way to engage in anti-trafficking efforts is to learn from and partner with
others. Learn from those who have experience and expertise. Partner with like-minded
organizations. A lone-wolf approach to anti-trafficking is never in the best interest of
trafficking victims and can even wind up doing more unintentional harm than good.

       • Engage Together (engagetogether.com) offers a church toolkit that is a free
         download, with an upcoming video training curriculum series focused on
         helping churches create action plans (fall 2015). The website also serves as a
         virtual community of advocates where you can engage with other individuals
         and organizations focused on anti-trafficking efforts.

       • Freedom Collaborative (freedomcollaborative.org) is a registry of vetted an-
         ti-trafficking organizations, grouped by location, which allows you to search for
         and connect with like-­minded organizations in your area. The site also includes
         a library of resources.

Note: As a church, our first step should never be to start a new nonprofit. Seek first to
partner with like-minded organizations in need of your resources, gifts, and talents. If
God has given you clear direction to start something new, seek wisdom from others with
experience and expertise.


PRAYER

This “P” should come first and be a part of every activity your church engages in. Human
trafficking is an evil that we can never fight on our own, and those engaged in the issue
need God’s presence, peace, and purpose to avoid burnout.

Ultimately, human trafficking is just a symptom of the bigger issue of broken relation-
ships—with God, others, self, and systems.

You can find many downloadable prayer guides online:

       • ncm.org/trafficking (Freedom Sunday resources)
       • aHeartforJustice.com (resources / prayer guides)

The ideas in this section were drawn in part from the Engage Together Church Toolkit
(engagetogether.com) and Shared Hope International’s “Slaying the Dragon” (sharedhope.org).


Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 16
What Can Our Church Support?

The Church of the Nazarene is present in many countries where children and adults
are vulnerable to exploitation and trafficking. In these areas, Nazarene Compassionate
Ministries partners with local churches in anti-­trafficking efforts that range from prevention
and education to protection and rehabilitation.

Internationally, the church’s strongest engagement with the problem of human trafficking is
through prevention, including education aimed at at-risk children and youth through child
development centers and providing economic and educational opportunities to lower the
risk of poverty-induced trafficking.

The work of churches and compassionate ministries centers to improve economic self-
sufficiency, social inclusion, gender equality, community cooperation, positive character
and values, self-efficacy, family relationships, and youth resilience can help to reduce
vulnerability of their targeted communities to human trafficking.

Economic and Child Development Centers help children succeed in school and learn how
precious they are to God, which in turn helps them see themselves as valued.

Women’s self-help groups and skills training programs empower members to improve
their household finances, which lessens their children's risk of being trafficked.

Programs that focus on orphaned children bring children into families and keep them off
the streets where they are vulnerable to abuse and “too good to be true” offers of employ-
ment elsewhere. The church, through Nazarene Compassionate Ministries, also partners
in ministries that help survivors of trafficking by offering rehabilitative services and skills
development.



Nazarene-Affiliated Projects You Can Support:

NCM Global Anti-Trafficking Fund. The Church of the Nazarene has a presence in many
countries, including the U.S., where children and adults are vulnerable to trafficking. In
these areas, NCM partners with local churches in anti-trafficking efforts that range from
prevention and education to protection and rehabilitation. ncm.org/trafficking.

Rest Stop Ministries (reststopministries.org). Birthed out of Hermitage (Tennessee) Church
of the Nazarene, Rest Stop is a 2-­year residential program, following a “housing-first”
model for survivors of sex trafficking.
Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 17
Scholarships for Trafficking Survivors. For young people who have escaped trafficking
to find freedom, the road to restoration is not an easy one. Education can play a crucial
role in an individual’s movement toward a new life.

Point Loma Nazarene University has established the Beauty for Ashes scholarship to sup-
port the education of trafficking survivors as well as launch passionate young people into
careers that address the problem of human trafficking. Learn more at pointloma.edu/cjr.

CIS Child Development Program. In the CIS region (former Soviet Union), child devel-
opment ministries in Ukraine and Armenia are doing targeted prevention education for
at-risk children and youth to prevent trafficking before it starts. Learn more through ncm.
org/trafficking, where you can search for Nazarene-­affiliated anti-­trafficking programs.

Child Sponsorship (ncm.org/cs). NCM’s monthly Child Sponsorship program lessens the
vulnerabilities of disadvantaged children through education, spiritual development, and
more. There is also an opportunity to support the Unsponsored Children Fund through
one-time gifts that enable church-led child development centers to minister to children who
are still waiting for sponsors. Learn more at ncm.org/children.


Learn more about the Nazarene church’s anti-­trafficking efforts: ncm.org/trafficking.




Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)

                                                 18
APPENDIX: A Few Things to Consider

Shared Hope International offers 7 things to keep in mind when engaging in anti-trafficking efforts:

1. Working with trafficking victims can be challenging. The abuse they have suffered is a source of
   trauma and healing takes time; it requires patience from those who help them. Understandably, it
   also takes time to build their trust. When Christians serve them and their needs, they serve Jesus.

2. Many survivors have been wounded by people and clergy in their churches. Effective services
   provided by agencies/ organizations include a variety of approaches that must be respected
   by caregivers and volunteers. These services must respect trafficking survivors’ choices and
   self-­determination; attempting to control their choices, even if well intentioned, can be harmful.
   We best demonstrate God’s healing love through actions rather than words.

3. Men are not the enemy. Although demand for sex, both actual and virtual (pornography) is
   the root of the problem and buyers/users are overwhelmingly male, honorable men are key to
   changing the culture of tolerance. Engage the men in your community and call upon them to
   be role models for male youth. The Man Up Campaign (www.manupcampaign.org) and The
   Defenders USA (www.sharedhope.org/defenders) are examples of programs that men in your
   community can support.

4. Overwhelmed with a need to make a big difference, good people may gravitate only toward
   the grandest of actions (i.e., opening a shelter or saving a child from the streets) and feel that
   anything else is small and won’t make an impact. This cannot be further from the truth and may
   come from a place of pride (Phil. 2:3). There is a broad spectrum of needs, both great and
   small, in the anti-­trafficking movement. Let experts explain what their needs are and respond
   accordingly. The impact of meeting a seemingly small need may not be immediately obvious.

5. Perhaps the most common pitfall is discouragement, abandoning the cause and the call
   because it is just too overwhelming. Always keep in mind that it is about one life at a time.
   Think of the parable of The Lost Sheep (Matthew 18:12-­14) in which a shepherd leaves his
   flock in order to find the one sheep that is lost.

6. When the children of Israel finally went into the Promised Land, the Jordan River parted to
   allow them to pass but only after they first stepped into it (Joshua 3:15-17). This is good
   symbolism for us as we work to fight trafficking. We may not see where our struggle is lead-
   ing, but we need to step out in faith. We must do the things we feel called to do without being
   able to see the endpoint. Moses led his people on an incredible journey of faith but he never
   entered the Promised Land.

7. Act responsibly. Matthew 10:16 warns us to “be wise as serpents and innocent as doves.”
   You should not attempt direct street outreach without training from someone who knows the
   streets. Without proper training you can put the child at increased risk of violence, not to men-
   tion the matter of your own safety. Never pay a child for time to talk in the hopes of rescuing
   her. Go through the appropriate and proper channels to assist victims.

Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)
                                                  19
Nazarene Compassionate Ministries • ncm.org • Human Trafficking and Church Engagement (U.S. Focus)
