             Howard County
 Office of Human Trafficking Prevention
Department of Community Resources and Services
   2023 ANNUAL REPORT and PLAN for 2024
                                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                              BACKGROUND
                                                                    The History                            1



                                                              COORDINATION
                                                                    of HTPCC Activities                    2



                                                              DRIVING THE TEAM
                                                                    Core Team of Law Enforcement
                                                                    and Victim Services                    3



                                                              ACTIVITIES
                                                                    2022-2023 Highlights                   3



                                                              KEY HIGHLIGHTS
                                                                    Key Overview                           6
                                                                    Key Law Enforcement Data               6
                                                                    Victim Services Data                   7



                                                              WORK PLANS
                                                                    Strengthen Core Team                    8
                                                                    Foundation for Victim Identification    8
                                                                    Develop Outreach Plan                   9
                                                                    Plans for 2024 and Beyond              11




    9830 Patuxent Woods Drive
    Columbia, MD 21046
    410-313-6400 (voice/relay)
    www.howardcountymd.gov/OHTP
    © june 2024


2      Howard County Office of Human Trafficking Prevention
                       2023 ANNUAL REPORT AND PLAN FOR 2024

                           HOWARD COUNTY OFFICE OF
             HUMAN TRAFFICKING PREVENTION
                      Department of Community Resources and Services




               BACKGROUND
               In 2014, Howard County commissioned the first Howard County
               Human Trafficking Task Force. Task Force members concluded
               that there was a strong basis to recommend increased services
               to victims; human trafficking awareness education for everyone
               in our community; and additional coordination between our
               various partnering agencies and community-based organizations.
               The Department of Community Resources and Services (DCRS)
               created the Office of Human Trafficking Prevention (OHTP) in
               2017 and the implementation of an Executive Order establishing
               the Howard County Human Trafficking Prevention Coordination
               Council (HTPCC). The Executive Order required the council
               to conduct the following activities: review and prioritize the
               recommendations of the Human Trafficking Task Force Report
               of 2014 and advise the County Executive on effective methods
               and organizational structure to permanently coordinate and
               sustain human trafficking prevention efforts in the county. The
               Coordination Council began meeting in mid-2017 focused on
               these tasks.

In early fall 2022, OHTP began a contractual partnership with TurnAround Inc. to provide direct services to
survivors of human trafficking in Howard County before officially becoming the new service provider partner
under a grant awarded by the U.S. Department of Justice’s Office for Victims of Crime (OVC) October 1, 2022.
TurnAround continued to be the official direct service partner when OHTP was awarded a grant extension from
September 2023 until September 2024.


               The HTPCC was made permanent by County legislation in 2019
               (CB 52-2019) and remains staffed by the DCRS OHTP. In late 2019,
               the HTPCC and DCRS issued a multi-year report to the County
               Executive making several recommendations regarding the HTPCC,
               DCRS’ OHTP and future efforts against trafficking.



                                                                         OHTP Annual Report and Work Plan for 2024   1
                              BACKGROUND, CONTINUED...

                              Two of the most direct recommendations to OHTP were to seek
                              outside funding sources to expand the county’s ability to do this
                              work and increase its staffing level. Both have been accomplished.
                              In fall 2020, Howard County’s collective human trafficking team of
                              OHTP, HopeWorks of Howard County and Howard County Police
                              Department’s (HCPD) Vice and Narcotics Unit, Human Trafficking
                              Section received a competitive three-year award from the OVC
                              under its Enhanced Collaborative Model Task Force to Combat
                              Human Trafficking. This award generally operationalizes local
                              human task forces and seeks to align them with best practices in
                              law enforcement, victim services and public engagement efforts in
                              the anti-trafficking field. Howard County was one of only nine new
                              jurisdictions nationwide selected for this award in 2020, joining
                              an elite group of 45 local and statewide task forces funded by this
                              award as of spring 2022. This award and all the team’s collective
                              progress towards its goals are managed by OHTP.

                              In early fall 2022, OHTP began a contractual partnership with
                              TurnAround Inc. to provide direct services to survivors of human
                              trafficking in Howard County before officially becoming the
                              new service provider partner under the awarded OVC grant on
                              October 1, 2022. TurnAround continued to be the official direct
                              service partner when OHTP was awarded a grant extension from
                              September 2023 until September 2024.

               Howard County was one of only nine new jurisdictions nationwide selected for this award (OVC) in 2020, joining an
               elite group of 45 local and statewide task forces funded by this award as of spring 2022. This award and all the team’s
               collective progress towards its goals are managed by OHTP.




                              COORDINATION OF HTPCC ACTIVITIES
                              OHTP serves as lead staff to the HTPCC which consists of over
                              20 appointed and volunteer members. The HTPCC is currently
                              chaired by Dr. Jon Steuernagle, with Alicia Altamirano serving as
                              vice-chair. It meets bi-monthly as a full group and includes an
                              active Training, Outreach and Partnerships subcommittee that
                              meets regularly. OHTP staff endeavor to support productive
                              HTPCC meetings and involve HTPCC members as much as
                              possible on appropriate work around their interests and
                              expertise. There is a basic self-training requirement and limited
                              confidentiality agreement for all members while meetings remain
                              open to the public. In 2022, the HTPCC adopted updated member
                              expectations which request all members assist in connecting
                              OHTP to at least one community outreach opportunity per year.
                              At different times over the past two years OHTP has facilitated
                              smaller group meetings around policy, legislation, medical, and
                              real estate issues that will convene only as needed going forward.
                              OHTP continues to recruit new partners that are well-positioned
                              to enhance our collective work to join HTPCC meetings or
                              collaborate outside of meetings.



2   Howard County Office of Human Trafficking Prevention
DRIVING THE HOWARD COUNTY CORE TEAM OF
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND VICTIM SERVICES
The HTPCC Core Team meets monthly to confidentially review
human trafficking investigations, cases and recent tips and discuss
appropriate service provisions — always seeking to utilize a
victim-centered, multi-disciplinary approach. The Core Team along
with the full HTPCC also holds quarterly, generalized victim service
and law enforcement data reviews — with the understanding that
our data does not indicate the true prevalence of sex and/or labor
trafficking in the county. Our goals are to continue regular reviews
and analysis of our county law enforcement, services, training,
partnerships and other task force related data, identifying any
trends or key observations over time and using that information
to inform future HTPCC actions, like education and outreach
focused more on labor trafficking due to the low instances of labor
trafficking victim identification in the county.



OHTP KEY ACTIVITIES 2022-2023
Key activities built on the office’s foundation of raising community
awareness of trafficking with educational presentations for
community groups and workplace focused trainings. OHTP will
continue to conduct these valuable activities, enhance those
efforts, and take on additional projects to improve our local
responses to trafficking.

1.	HCPD, OHTP and TurnAround continued to conduct
    in-person and virtual educational presentations for
    local community groups with introductory education on
    sex and labor trafficking and available local resources.
    Fourteen training and educational sessions were provided
    to community organizations, including the Health
    Department; Howard County Public School students
    and staff; students from Howard Community College
    in the nursing and health-related fields; the Maryland
    Department of Transportation; and the legal staff from
    Luminus who provide immigration services. During this
    reporting period, these sessions reached approximately
    354 individuals.

2.	The OHTP and different HTPCC members continue
    to conduct passive outreach through community-
    wide events and initiatives to the general public to
    raise awareness and share appropriate local contact
    information for TurnAround, HCPD and the National
    Human Trafficking Hotline.




                                              OHTP Annual Report and Work Plan for 2024   3
                               KEY ACTIVITIES, CONTINUED...

                               3.       The OHTP and contracted partner Centro de los
                                         Derechos del Migrante (CDM) conducted its final
                                         outreach visits (funded by Howard County), to known
                                         H2A (temporary U.S. agricultural work) and some H2B
                                         (temporary U.S. non-agricultural work) workers in June
                                         2023 to continue making positive rights-based contact
                                         with this group of highly vulnerable migrant workers.
                                        • Visits were made to retail locations workers tend
                                          to frequent after work. Forty-eight individuals were
                                          spoken with in Spanish and provided information
                                          about their rights at work and CDM's services.
                                        • One person asked what discrimination can look like at
                                          work, and another said that she might call to speak to
                                          CDM’s legal team because she had an experience on the
                                          job and wants to know if her employer violated the law.
                                        • Repeat visits were also conducted to residences of
                                          agricultural workers in the western part of the county.
                                          On the initial visits, workers expressed the need for
                                          food to make ends meet. CDM workers brought several
                                          bags of perishable/non-perishable foods. Workers
                                          confirmed that, because of the amount of rain in the
                                          last few weeks, they haven't had as much work, and
                                          were grateful for the assistance.
                                        • One man said he and his colleagues have really been
                                          wanting to take English classes but haven't found one
                                          that fits with their work schedule. CDM summer interns
                                          were able to identify options and follow up with him.
                                        • Another expressed concerns about taxes and what can
                                           be deducted from his paycheck. A recent Facebook
                                           Live hosted by CDM about taxes for H-2A workers was
                                           shared with him.

                                        Altogether, we reached 51 people on this trip.




4   Howard County Office of Human Trafficking Prevention
KEY ACTIVITIES, CONTINUED...

4.	
   The Core Team confidential meetings moved to quarterly
   case review for adult sex trafficking cases and credible
   tips as well as any labor trafficking cases and tips. A
   separate multidisciplinary team case review meeting for
   sex trafficking cases involving youth under the age of 24
   years old was established by TurnAround’s state-funded
   youth sex trafficking regional navigator in December
   when it held its first meeting. Participants in that meeting
   are TurnAround‘s Regional Navigator, HCPD, our local
   Department of Social Services, Howard County Public
   School principals or key staff to the extent appropriate on
   a particular case. Confidentiality and information sharing
   protocols are in place to protect all personal information of
   victims in each meeting. Meetings to date have focused on:
       • How referrals and occasional in-person support on law
         enforcement operations from TurnAround will occur.
       • How credible referrals from OHTP and other key
         partners — particularly with victims 24 years old and
         under — should be sent to TurnAround staff.
       • How to confirm service availability, provision, ideal
         methods of communication outside of meetings and
         protocol development.

5.	OHTP online training was launched and is now required
    to be taken by all Howard County employees. The training
    was virtually completed by approximately 3,000 full-time
    and contingent employees as of September 2023.

6.	The Community Assessment was completed and compiled
    into a quantitative and qualitative report. Work will begin
    on analyzing the findings of the assessment to recognize
    the vulnerabilities of human trafficking victims and ways
    to best provide outreach and support.




                                             OHTP Annual Report and Work Plan for 2024   5
                             Howard County Human Trafficking
                             Key Data Highlights*

                             DIRECT SERVICE PROVIDER DATA
                             January 1 through December 31, 2022.
                             The number of trafficking survivors TurnAround served and
                             provided a wide variety of supportive and high-quality services.

                             January 1 through December 31, 2023.
                             The number of trafficking survivors TurnAround served and
                             provided a wide variety of supportive and high-quality services.


                             HOWARD COUNTY LAW ENFORCEMENT DATA
                             January 1 through December 31, 2022.
                             The number of potential trafficking victims HCPD’s human
                             trafficking section identified and offered to connect them with
                             appropriate, high-quality services.

                             January 1,2023, through December 31, 2023.
                             The number of potential trafficking victims HCPD’s human
                             trafficking section identified and offered to connect them with
                             appropriate, high-quality services.




                             HUMAN TRAFFICKING VICTIM DATA
                             HCPD VICE AND NARCOTICS DIVISION
                             Data represents the number of unduplicated contacts with
                             potential victims by HCPD’s highly-trained unit in human
                             trafficking.

                             2018 — 10 adults + two juveniles = 12 TOTAL VICTIMS
                             2019 — 29 adults + three juveniles = 32 TOTAL VICTIMS
                             2020 — 15 adults + two juveniles = 17 TOTAL VICTIMS
                             2021 — seven adults + one juveniles = 8 TOTAL VICTIMS
                             2022 — 23 adults + two juveniles = 25 TOTAL VICTIMS
                             2023 — 36 adults + three juveniles = 39 TOTAL VICTIMS
                             * Caution: These numbers are NOT indicators of prevalence of
                               sex or labor trafficking and can be misleading taken out of
                               appropriate context.




6   Howard County Office of Human Trafficking Prevention
               HOWARD COUNTY VICTIM SERVICES DATA
               During the 12-month period January 1 through December 31,
               2023, TurnAround served 50 victims of trafficking, providing the
               following services:
               • Case management.
               • Protection and safety planning.
               • Therapy services (traditional, cultural, alternative healing, art,
                 writing, or play therapy).
               • Transitional housing.
               • Transportation assistance.

               NOTE:	TurnAround offers a broad spectrum of direct services
                       and referrals. The aforementioned list represents the
                       most highly utilized resources for survivors during the
                       designated time period.

               Our data is consistent with law enforcement and service trends in
               many jurisdictions nationwide: heavily focused on sex trafficking,
               not labor trafficking, or cases involving sex and labor trafficking.
               The length of time an individual trafficking victim remains
               actively in services with a high-quality service provider can vary
               significantly.

While future data sets will unlikely paint a complete picture of trafficking in the county, we expect they will
allow us to draw better conclusions in terms of focus and future resource allocation.


               OHTP urges readers not to draw any conclusions about the
               prevalence of trafficking in Howard County from any of the law
               enforcement, victim services or OHTP data presented above.
               Law enforcement and service data can be misleading without
               appropriate context. It remains OHTP’s hope that, in the next
               several years, with more focused outreach efforts and the
               building out of the county’s regional navigator presence, Howard
               County will see more sex and labor trafficking cases identified,
               investigated and prosecuted with victim-centered methods, and
               victims of all ages will be provided the high-quality services that
               best fit their needs.

               Over the next year the county will benefit from a longer, steadier
               stream of relevant local law enforcement and victim service data
               alongside TurnAround for trafficking victims of all ages. While
               future data sets will unlikely paint a complete picture of trafficking
               in the county, we expect it will allow us to draw better conclusions
               in terms of focus and future resource allocation.




                                                                              OHTP Annual Report and Work Plan for 2024   7
                             OHTP WORK PLAN FOR 2024

                             STRENGTHEN OUR CORE TEAM
                             AND THE HTPCC BY
                             1. Enhancing and sustaining critical direct services available to
                                 trafficking survivors, embracing a stronger, regional approach
                                 with local direct service providers.
                             2. Leaning on support from HTPCC members, completing
                                 and adopting protocols that establish lasting best-practice
                                 guidelines for the HTPCC.
                             3. Initiating positive, ongoing survivor leader and lived experience
                                 expert consulting relationships to enhance all our work.
                             4. Conducting additional community awareness and education
                                 initiatives and trainings using standardized materials in
                                 partnership with the HTPCC.
                                 a. Continuing to enhance the OHTP website with useful
                                    learning opportunities for the public, including industry
                                    fact sheets, noting applicable labor laws in industries
                                    where exploitation occurs nationally.
                                 b. Maintaining a community outreach annual calendar with
                                    HTPCC member’s support.
                                 c.   Growing our list of community contacts and partner DCRS
                                      offices.
                             5. Remaining data-driven in our work with detailed quarterly
                                 data reviews and ongoing vulnerability reassessments. These
                                 will guide law enforcement, service provision, outreach and
                                 partnership strategy, and resource direction.


                             LAY FOUNDATION FOR GREATER VICTIM
                             IDENTIFICATION, ESPECIALLY LABOR
                             TRAFFICKING
                             1. Conduct and complete a thorough analysis of the Community
                                 Assessment findings that highlight the many vulnerabilities
                                 of human trafficking victims. Through this analysis, strategic
                                 approaches for outreach and training will be able to be
                                 developed and implemented.
                             2. Build connections and partnerships with organizations
                                 focused on addressing labor rights, immigration services,
                                 labor exploitation, and labor trafficking.
                             3. Continue to implement basic human trafficking awareness
                                 training for all Howard County employees, reaching
                                 approximately 3,000 individuals.




8   Howard County Office of Human Trafficking Prevention
IMPLEMENT LONG-TERM, MULTI-MODAL,
PROACTIVE OUTREACH PLAN
1. Continued expansion of the reach of OHTP through its HTPCC,
    and new partnerships with other county agencies, immigrant-
    focused groups and service organizations, key faith and
    community organizers and groups, businesses, and business
    organizations.
2. Increased collaboration with various county commissions
    to ensure relevant needs of residents and populations are
    included in outreach work.
3. Consistent resident-led outreach efforts to vulnerable
    workers. Focus will be on embracing the best practice
    of meeting workers safely where they are, building trust
    and offering useful information on their rights and other
    immediate needs. We will embrace a rights-based approach
    to this outreach, meaning that workers are not passive
    recipients of services, but active participants in the direction
    of their lives.
4. Marketing plans for print and digital materials, with thoughtful
    pacing of future material rollouts and public awareness
    campaigns, social media, branding and consistency for OHTP
    and HTPCC.
5. Prioritizing future areas of focus for training and community
    awareness efforts including
    a. Strategic informational postings in businesses, churches
       and other religious and community congregation
       locations, and other public locations in the county.
    b. Public recognition for voluntary staff training(s) using live
       or online recorded content created by and/or approved
       by the HTPCC and other initiatives.
    c.   Updates to county contracting policies to emphasize
         human trafficking awareness and zero tolerance for labor
         violations.




                                                OHTP Annual Report and Work Plan for 2024   9
                              OUTREACH PLAN, CONTINUED...


                              6. Strategizing and planning events for Human Trafficking
                                  Prevention Month for community members, lived experience
                                  experts, partners, and direct service providers.
                                  a. OHTP and HTPCC started the groundwork for these
                                     events which took place on January 17 and 31, 2024.
                                  b. OHTP, along with TurnAround, participated in a virtual
                                     film discussion highlighting the realities of sex trafficking
                                     in the United States. This discussion was filmed and
                                     recorded and placed on the OHTP’s website for access
                                     and distribution.
                                  c.   OHTP and the HTPCC hosted an expert panel event
                                       within the community January 31, 2024, which consisted
                                       of expert partners in the field and focused on the U.S.
                                       Department of Health and Human Services theme of
                                       Partner2Prevent and highlighted prevention efforts and
                                       the importance of community collaboration. Several
                                       community partners and service providers were present
                                       to network with approximately 50 registered participants.
                              7. Planning and facilitating community events that highlight the
                                  needs of those with lived experience while remaining trauma
                                  informed. These events will focus on community partnerships
                                  and action steps for the residents of Howard County to
                                  become involved with the work of OHTP in a meaningful way
                                  that addresses direct prevention efforts in 2024.




10   Howard County Office of Human Trafficking Prevention
OHTP PLANS FOR 2024
AND BEYOND
In addition to continuing its core work of ensuring survivors
are offered high quality services; supporting survivors and law
enforcement each appropriately; overseeing our data efforts and
OVC award activities; and coordinating community education,
awareness and training efforts, OHTP plans to:

1. Complete and continue to work on OVC Purpose Area 2 award
    activities, consider future applications for OVC and other
    sources of outside funds to sustain effective anti-trafficking
    work.
2. Utilize OVC funds for needed contractual partnerships when
    serving victims of labor trafficking and engaging with lived
    experience experts.
3. Begin steps to create a survivor alliance coalition with Howard
    County for lived experience experts.
4. Implement sustainable outreach plans while continuously
    revisiting new data and vulnerability indicators.
5. Attend human trafficking specific conferences, summits and
    conventions for professional development and to remain
    updated on best practice measures.
6. Develop and standardize trainings for the community and
    facilitate specialized trainings for community partners who
    work directly with residents who may be more vulnerable to
    human trafficking.
7. In partnership with TurnAround, and other local and regional
    partners, work to increase emergency shelter and longer-
    term housing options and work opportunities for trafficking
    survivors. Business recognition initiatives, other existing
    partnerships will hopefully play a positive role in these
    activities.




                                              OHTP Annual Report and Work Plan for 2024   11
           OUR MISSION
           Our mandate to work against sex and labor trafficking in Howard
           County is supported in part through the work of the HTPCC, an
           appointed and voluntary body which held its first meeting in
           December 2017. The HTPCC was made permanent by County
           legislation, (CB 52-2019) that took effect January 2020.

           OHTP aligns with the values and standards of the Maryland
           Human Trafficking Task Force, partnering with anti-trafficking
           agencies and organizations which conform responsibly to best
           practices in the field.




Department of Community Resources and Services
9830 Patuxent Woods Drive, Columbia, MD 21046
410-313-6400 (voice/relay)
www.howardcountymd.gov/OHTP
If you need this information in an alternate format, contact the Office of Human Trafficking Prevention
                     at 410-313-6558 (voice/relay) or ohtp@howardcountymd.gov.
                                             © june 2024
